INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

WORLD
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK
Global Economy in Flux,
Prospects Remain Dim

2025

OCT

INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND

WORLD
ECONOMIC
OUTLOOK

Global Economy in Flux,
Prospects Remain Dim

2025

OCT

©2025 International Monetary Fund
Cover and Design: IMF CSF Creative Solutions Division
Cataloging-in-Publication Data
IMF Library
Names: International Monetary Fund.
Title: World economic outlook (International Monetary Fund)
Other titles: WEO | Occasional paper (International Monetary Fund) | World economic and
financial surveys.
Description: Washington, DC : International Monetary Fund, 1980- | Semiannual | Some
issues also have thematic titles. | Began with issue for May 1980. | 1981-1984: Occasional
paper / International Monetary Fund, 0251-6365 | 1986-: World economic and financial
surveys, 0256-6877.
Identifiers: ISSN 0256-6877 (print) | ISSN 1564-5215 (online)
Subjects: LCSH: Economic development—Periodicals. | International economic relations—
Periodicals. | Debts, External—Periodicals. | Balance of payments—Periodicals. |
International finance—Periodicals. | Economic forecasting—Periodicals.
Classification: LCC HC10.W79
HC10.80
ISBN 979-8-22902-394-8 (English Paper)
979-8-22902-402-0 (English ePub)
979-8-22902-400-6 (English Web PDF)
Disclaimer: The World Economic Outlook (WEO) is a survey by the IMF staff published twice a year, in the spring and fall. The WEO is prepared by the IMF staff and
has benefited from comments and suggestions by Executive Directors following their
discussion of the report on September 29, 2025. The views expressed in this publication are those of the IMF staff and do not necessarily represent the views of the IMF’s
Executive Directors or their national authorities.
Recommended citation: International Monetary Fund. 2025. World Economic Outlook:
Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim. Washington, DC. October.
Publication orders may be placed online, by fax, or through the mail:
International Monetary Fund, Publication Services
P.O. Box 92780, Washington, DC 20090, USA
Tel.: (202) 623-7430 Fax: (202) 623-7201
E-mail: publications@IMF.org
bookstore.IMF.org
elibrary.IMF.org
Errata
October 22, 2025
This web version of the WEO has been updated to reflect the following changes to the version published online on October 14, 2025:
- Chapter 1, Commodity Special Feature, page 35: “Vida Maver” was added to the contributor list footnote.
- Chapter 2, section titled “The Contribution of Policy Frameworks to Macroeconomic Stabilization,” page 62: “Easterly and others
(1993)” was added to the first sentence. The full reference was added to the reference list on page 72.
- Chapter 2, Figure 2.3.1, panel 2, page 70: “(Percent)” was corrected to “(Percentage points).”
- Statistical Appendix, Table A2, page 125: The data for the first 12 columns for the Czech Republic and Norway were corrected.

CONTENTS

Assumptions and Conventions

vii

Further Information

ix

Data

x

Preface

xi

Foreword

xii

Executive Summary

xv

Chapter 1. Global Prospects and Policies

1

A New Global Economic Landscape Slowly Takes Shape
Recent Developments: Resilience Giving Way to Warning Signs
Policy Mix: Loose Fiscal and Divergent Monetary
The Outlook: Dim Prospects
Risks to the Outlook: Still Tilted to the Downside
Policies: Bringing Confidence, Predictability, and Sustainability
Box 1.1. Trade Reallocation in Response to Tariffs: Will This Time Be Different?
Box 1.2. Risk Assessment Surrounding the Baseline Projection
Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and Commodity-Driven
Macroeconomic Fluctuations
References
Chapter 2. Emerging Market Resilience: Good Luck or Good Policies?

1
3
9
10
20
22
27
30
35
48
51

Introduction
Emerging Market Resilience to Risk-Off Episodes
The Evolution of Policy Frameworks in Emerging Markets
The Contribution of Policy Frameworks to Macroeconomic Stabilization
How to Deal with Future Risk-Off Shocks: Evidence from Model Simulations
Conclusions and Policy Implications
Box 2.1. IMF Arrangements and Emerging Market Resilience
Box 2.2. Milestones in Developing Monetary Policy Frameworks
Box 2.3. Macroeconomic Effects of Undermining Central Bank Independence
References

51
55
57
62
63
66
68
69
70
71

Chapter 3. Industrial Policy: Managing Trade-Offs to Promote Growth and Resilience

75

Introduction
The Return of Industrial Policy
Industrial Policy for Infant Industry Protection
Lessons from Key Industrial Policies, Past and Present
Industrial Policy and Sector Performance
Cross-Sector Spillovers and Aggregate Effects
Conclusions and Policy Implications
Box 3.1. Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on Misallocation

75
77
80
82
86
88
90
91

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

iii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 3.2. Support or Distort: Evaluating National State Aid in Europe
Box 3.3. A Comparison between Industrial and Structural Policies
References
Statistical Appendix
Assumptions
What’s New
Data and Conventions
Country Notes
Classification of Economies
General Features and Composition of Groups in the World Economic Outlook
Classification
Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in
Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods and Services, and Population, 2024
Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Table C. European Union
Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source
of Export Earnings
Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position,
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and Per Capita Income Classification
Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods
Table G. Key Data Documentation
Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for Selected Economies
List of Tables
Output (Tables A1–A4)
Inflation (Tables A5–A7)
Financial Policies (Table A8)
Foreign Trade (Table A9)
Current Account Transactions (Tables A10–A12)
Balance of Payments and External Financing (Table A13)
Flow of Funds (Table A14)
Medium-Term Baseline Scenario (Table A15)

92
93
94
97
97
97
97
99
101
101
103
104
104
105
106
108
109
119
123
124
131
136
137
139
146
150
153

World Economic Outlook Selected Topics

155

IMF Executive Board Discussion of the Outlook, September 2025

165

Tables
Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at
Market Exchange Rate Weights
Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices,
Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output
iv

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

12
14
42
43
44
45
46
47

contents

Online Tables—Statistical Appendix
Table B1. Advanced Economies: Unemployment, Employment, and Real GDP per Capita
Table B2. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
Table B3. Advanced Economies: Hourly Earnings, Productivity, and Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
Table B4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices
Table B5. Summary of Fiscal and Financial Indicators
Table B6. Advanced Economies: General and Central Government Net Lending/Borrowing
and General Government Net Lending/Borrowing Excluding Social Security Schemes
Table B7. Advanced Economies: General Government Structural Balances
Table B8. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government
Net Lending/Borrowing and Overall Fiscal Balance
Table B9. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: General Government Net Lending/Borrowing
Table B10. Selected Advanced Economies: Exchange Rates
Table B11. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Broad Money Aggregates
Table B12. Advanced Economies: Export Volumes, Import Volumes, and Terms of
Trade in Goods and Services
Table B13. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: Total Trade in Goods
Table B14. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Source of
Export Earnings: Total Trade in Goods
Table B15. Summary of Current Account Transactions
Table B16. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Summary of External Debt and Debt Service
Table B17. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region: External Debt by Maturity
Table B18. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Analytical Criteria:
External Debt by Maturity
Table B19. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Ratio of External Debt to GDP
Table B20. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Debt-Service Ratios
Table B21. Emerging Market and Developing Economies, Medium-Term
Baseline Scenario: Selected Economic Indicators
Figures
Figure 1.1. US Effective Tariff Rates by Country
Figure 1.2. Overall, Economic Policy, and Trade Policy Uncertainty
Figure 1.3. Contributions to Quarterly GDP Growth
Figure 1.4. Consumer and Business Confidence
Figure 1.5. Impulse Responses to a Tariff-Uncertainty Shock
Figure 1.6. Global Inflation Trends
Figure 1.7. Impact of Tariffs on Prices
Figure 1.8. Tariffs, US Dollar, and Prices
Figure 1.9. Fiscal Policy
Figure 1.10. Global Assumptions
Figure 1.11. Changes in GDP Growth and Inflation
Figure 1.12. World Trade
Figure 1.13. Current Account and International Investment Positions
Figure 1.14. Projected Change in Current Account Balance
Figure 1.15. Medium-Term Growth Outlook
Figure 1.16. Official Development Assistance, Revenues, and Interest Burden
Figure 1.17. Migrant Stock and Remittances
Figure 1.1.1. Exports by Destination Country Type and Tariff Episode
Figure 1.1.2. Change in Exports by Destination Region and Tariff Episode
Figure 1.1.3. Change in China’s Exports by Destination Region and Tariff Episode in
Selected Sectors
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

2
2
4
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
16
17
17
18
18
19
19
27
28
29
v

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 1.2.1. Forecast Uncertainty around Global Growth and Inflation Projections
Figure 1.2.2. Impact of Scenario A on GDP
Figure 1.2.3. Impact of Scenario A in the United States, China, and the Euro Area
Figure 1.2.4. Impact of Scenario B on GDP
Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
Figure 1.SF.2. Size and Network-Adjusted Value-Added Share across Country Groups
Figure 1.SF.3. Importance of Interconnectedness over Size
Figure 1.SF.4. Model-Based Consumption Response to a 1 Percent Terms-of-Trade
Price Shock
Figure 1.SF.5. Model-Based Impulse Responses to a 1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Shock
Figure 1.SF.6. Monetary Policy Mistake Distribution, 2018
Figure 2.1. Changes in External Conditions and Policy Frameworks
Figure 2.2. Dates and Features of Risk-Off Episodes
Figure 2.3. Effects of Risk-Off Shocks
Figure 2.4. Monetary Policy Reaction Function
Figure 2.5. Central Bank Independence and Autonomy
Figure 2.6. Use of Foreign Exchange Interventions in Response to
Uncovered Interest Parity Deviations
Figure 2.7. Strength of Fiscal Frameworks
Figure 2.8. Cyclicality of Government Expenditures
Figure 2.9. Fiscal Policy and Debt Sustainability
Figure 2.10. Factors Contributing to Emerging Markets’ Resilience during Risk-Off Episodes
Figure 2.11. Policy Trade-Offs in Response to Risk-Off Shocks
Figure 2.12. Probability and Severity of Sudden Stops
Figure 2.13. Costs of Delaying Monetary Tightening for Emerging Markets with
Weak Policy Frameworks
Figure 2.14. Effects of Foreign Exchange Interventions
Figure 2.1.1. IMF Precautionary Arrangements and Their Role during Risk-Off Episodes
Figure 2.3.1. Effects of Politically Motivated Transitions
Figure 3.1. Global Evolution of Industrial Policies
Figure 3.2. Industrial Policy Interventions by Instrument and Estimated Fiscal Costs
Figure 3.3. Motivation for Industrial Policies and Targeted Sectors
Figure 3.4. Industrial Policy for Energy Security and Increasing Needs for Electricity
Figure 3.5. Intertemporal Trade-Offs Depend on Learning Rate
Figure 3.6. Key Sector Characteristics Determine the Long-Term Effects of Industrial Policy
Figure 3.7. Decomposition of EU Electric Vehicle Price Decline
Figure 3.8. No-IP and Reshoring Policies Accelerate Take-Up,
but Domestic Production Impacts Differ
Figure 3.9. Policy Options to Reduce Fossil Fuel Use through Access to
Cheaper Clean Technologies Present Trade-Offs
Figure 3.10. Industrial Policies and Medium-Term Performance of Targeted Sectors
Figure 3.11. Downstream Impact of Energy Sector Industrial Policy
Figure 3.12. Sectoral and Aggregate Effects of Industrial Policy
in the Energy Sector
Figure 3.13. Sectoral Effects and Aggregate Effects of Optimal and
Uniform Industrial Policy
Figure 3.1.1. China: Industrial Policy Support
Figure 3.2.1. Effects of State Aid on Recipient and Nonrecipient Firms
Figure 3.3.1. Industrial Policies versus Governance Reforms

vi

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

30
32
33
33
35
38
38
39
40
41
52
56
56
57
58
60
60
61
61
62
64
64
65
66
68
70
76
77
79
79
81
81
83
84
84
87
88
89
89
91
92
93

ASSUMPTIONS AND CONVENTIONS

A number of assumptions have been adopted for the projections presented in the World Economic Outlook
(WEO). It has been assumed that real effective exchange rates remained constant at their average levels during
August 1–August 29, 2025, except for those for the currencies participating in the European exchange rate mechanism II, which are assumed to have remained constant in nominal terms relative to the euro; that established
policies of national authorities will be maintained (for specific assumptions about fiscal and monetary policies for
selected economies, see Box A1 in the Statistical Appendix); that the average price of oil will be $68.92 a barrel
in 2025 and $65.84 a barrel in 2026; that the three-month government bond yield for the United States will
average 4.3 percent in 2025 and 3.7 percent in 2026, that for the euro area will average 2.0 percent in 2025 and
2.1 percent in 2026, and that for Japan will average 0.4 percent in 2025 and 0.8 percent in 2026; and that the
10-year government bond yield for the United States will average 4.3 percent in 2025 and 4.1 percent in 2026,
that for the euro area will average 2.5 percent in 2025 and 2.6 percent in 2026, and that for Japan will average
1.5 percent in 2025 and 1.7 percent in 2026. These are, of course, working hypotheses rather than forecasts, and
the uncertainties surrounding them add to the margin of error that would, in any event, be involved in the projections. The estimates and projections are based on statistical information available through September 30, 2025,
but may not reflect the latest published data in all cases. For the date of the last data update for each economy,
please refer to the notes provided in the online WEO database.
The following conventions are used throughout the WEO:
• . . . to indicate that data are not available or not applicable;
• – between years or months (for example, 2024–25 or January–June) to indicate the years or months covered,
including the beginning and ending years or months; and
• / between years or months (for example, 2024/25) to indicate a fiscal or financial year.
• “Billion” means a thousand million; “trillion” means a thousand billion.
• “Basis points” refers to hundredths of 1 percentage point (for example, 25 basis points are equivalent to ¼ of
1 percentage point).
• Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of a few countries that use fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in
the Statistical Appendix, which lists the economies with exceptional reporting periods for national accounts and
government finance data.
• For some countries, the figures for 2024 and earlier are based on estimates rather than actual outturns. Please
refer to Table G in the Statistical Appendix, which lists the latest actual outturns for the indicators in the
national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments for each country.
What is new in this publication:
• Data for Liechtenstein have been added to the database and are included in the advanced economies group
composites.
In the tables and figures, the following conventions apply:
• Tables and figures in this report that list their source as “IMF staff calculations” or “IMF staff estimates” draw
on data from the WEO database.
• When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
• Minor discrepancies between sums of constituent figures and totals shown reflect rounding.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

vii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

• Composite data are provided for various groups of countries organized according to economic characteristics or
region. Unless noted otherwise, country group composites represent calculations based on 90 percent or more of
the weighted group data.
• The boundaries, colors, denominations, and any other information shown on maps do not imply, on the part of
the IMF, any judgment on the legal status of any territory or any endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
As used in this report, the terms “country” and “economy” do not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is
a state as understood by international law and practice. As used here, the term also covers some territorial entities
that are not states but for which statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.

viii

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

FURTHER INFORMATION

Corrections and Revisions
The data and analysis appearing in the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are compiled by the IMF staff at the
time of publication. Every effort is made to ensure their timeliness, accuracy, and completeness. When errors are
discovered, corrections and revisions are incorporated into the digital editions available from the IMF website and
on the IMF eLibrary (see below). All substantive changes are listed in the online table of contents.

Print and Digital Editions
Print
Print copies of this WEO can be ordered from the IMF bookstore at imfbk.st/555871.

Digital
Multiple digital editions of the WEO, including ePub, enhanced PDF, and HTML, are available on the
IMF eLibrary at eLibrary.IMF.org/WEO.
Download a free PDF of the report and data sets for each of the charts therein from the IMF website at
www.IMF.org/publications/weo or scan the QR code below to access the WEO web page directly:

Copyright and Reuse
Information on the terms and conditions for reusing the contents of this publication are at www.imf.org/external/
terms.htm.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

ix

DATA

This version of the World Economic Outlook (WEO) is available in full through the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.
imf.org) and the IMF website (www.imf.org). Accompanying the publication on the IMF website is a larger compilation of data from the WEO database than is included in the report itself, including files containing the series
most frequently requested by readers. These files may be downloaded for use in a variety of software packages.
The data appearing in the WEO are compiled by the IMF staff at the time of the WEO exercises. The historical data and projections are based on the information gathered by the IMF country desk officers in the context
of their missions to IMF member countries and through their ongoing analysis of the evolving situation in each
country. Historical data are updated on a continual basis as more information becomes available, and structural
breaks in data are often adjusted to produce smooth series with the use of splicing and other techniques. IMF
staff estimates continue to serve as proxies for historical series when complete information is unavailable. As a
result, WEO data can differ from those in other sources with official data, including the IMF’s International
Financial Statistics.
The WEO data and metadata provided are “as is” and “as available,” and every effort is made to ensure their
timeliness, accuracy, and completeness, but these cannot be guaranteed. When errors are discovered, there is a
concerted effort to correct them as appropriate and feasible. Corrections and revisions made after publication are
incorporated into the electronic editions available from the IMF eLibrary (www.elibrary.imf.org) and on the IMF
website (www.imf.org). All substantive changes are listed in detail in the online tables of contents.
For details on the terms and conditions for usage of the WEO database, please refer to the IMF Copyright and
Usage website (www.imf.org/external/terms.htm).
Inquiries about the content of the WEO and the WEO database should be sent by mail or email (telephone
inquiries cannot be accepted):
World Economic Studies Division
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431, USA
Email: DataHelp@IMF.org

x

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

PREFACE

The analysis and projections contained in the World Economic Outlook are integral elements of the IMF’s
surveillance of economic developments and policies in its member countries, of developments in international
financial markets, and of the global economic system. The survey of prospects and policies is the product of a
comprehensive interdepartmental review of world economic developments, which draws primarily on information
the IMF staff gathers through its consultations with member countries. These consultations are carried out
in particular by the IMF’s area departments—namely, the African Department, Asia and Pacific Department,
European Department, Middle East and Central Asia Department, and Western Hemisphere Department—
together with the Strategy, Policy, and Review Department; the Monetary and Capital Markets Department; and
the Fiscal Affairs Department.
The analysis in this report was coordinated in the Research Department under the general direction of
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Economic Counsellor and Director of Research. The project was directed by Petya
Koeva Brooks, Deputy Director, Research Department, and Deniz Igan, Division Chief, Research Department.
The primary contributors to this report are Shekhar Aiyar, Hippolyte Balima, Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi,
Christian Bogmans, Marijn Arend Bolhuis, Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, Francesco Grigoli, Thomas Kroen,
Toh Kuan, Rafael Machado Parente, Chiara Maggi, Vida Maver, Jorge Miranda Pinto, Jean-Marc Natal,
Diaa Noureldin, Galip Kemal Ozhan, Andrea Paloschi, Andrea F. Presbitero, Yu Shi, Sebastian Wende, and
Zhao Zhang.
Other contributors include Maryam Abdou, Gavin Asdorian, Pedro de Barros Gagliardi, Jared Bebee,
Francis Cuadros Bloch, Luis Brandao-Marques, Thomas J. Carter, Wenbo Chen, Owen Desberg, Angela Espiritu,
Ganchimeg Ganpurev, Sarah Garcia, Daniel Garcia-Macia, Bertrand Gruss, Gee Hee Hong, Adam Jakubik,
Maximiliano Jerez Osses, Marcin Kolasa, Siddharth Kothari, Jungjin Lee, Weili Lin, Jesper Linde, Giulio Lisi,
Barry Liu, Rui Mano, Roland Meeks, Joseph Moussa, Dirk Muir, Emory Oakes, Clarita Phillips, Rafael Portillo,
Sofia Quinonez, Shrihari Ramachandra, Lorenzo Rotunno, Isabela Rozario, Ilgim Simnick, Monika Sztajerowska,
Hedda Thorell, Nicholas Tong, Hasan Toprak, Riya Varghese, Simon Voigts, Xinyi Wang, Evgenia Weaver,
Yarou Xu, and Dian Zhi.
Gemma Rose Diaz from the Communications Department led the editorial team for the report, with
production and editorial support from Michael Harrup, Kristina Harwood, Lucy Scott Morales, James Unwin,
MPS Limited, and Absolute Service, Inc.
The analysis has benefited from comments and suggestions by staff members from other IMF departments, as
well as by Executive Directors following their discussion of the report on September 29, 2025. However, estimates,
projections, and policy considerations are those of the IMF staff and should not be attributed to Executive
Directors or to their national authorities.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

xi

FOREWORD

An Unchanged Outlook Masks Complex
Forces as the Policy Landscape Shifts
In April of this year, the United States announced
the imposition of sizable tariffs against most of its trading partners, in a major departure from trade policy
rules and norms. Given the complexity and fluidity
of the moment, as well as the lack of certainty about
announced policies, the April 2025 World Economic
Outlook (WEO) offered a range of estimates of the
downward revision in global growth, from modest to
significant, depending on the ultimate severity of the
trade shock.
Six months later, where do we stand? The good
news is that the negative impact on the global economy is at the modest end of the range. Thanks to the
agility of the private sector, which front-loaded imports
in the first half of the year and speedily reorganized
supply chains to redirect trade flows, the negotiation of
trade deals between various countries and the US and
the overall restraint from the rest of the world, which
by and large kept the trading system open, global
growth is now projected at 3.2 percent this year and
3.1 percent next year.
Should we conclude that the shock triggered by
the tariff surge had no effect on global growth? That
would be both premature and incorrect.
Premature because the US effective tariff rate
remains high (at about 19 percent), and trade tensions
continue to cast a shadow over the global economy,
with trade policy uncertainty remaining high. The
effect of these tensions could well increase over time as
firms gradually pass the tariffs on to customers as trade
is rerouted more permanently and the global economy gradually becomes less efficient. Past experience
suggests that it may take a long time before the full
picture emerges.
Incorrect because other important forces, besides
trade policy, are shaping a complex outlook. In
the United States, stricter immigration policies are
reducing the labor supplied by foreign-born workers,
another negative supply shock. Yet, so far, this has been
offset by a roughly equivalent decline in labor demand,

xii

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

coming from a cyclical cooling after many years of
strong job growth. This leaves the labor market in a
precarious balance, with a mostly unchanged unemployment rate. Second, financial conditions remain
very accommodative, with a dollar that has lost some
of its strength. And third, we are witnessing a strong
boom in artificial intelligence (AI)–related investment
coupled with a modestly expansionary fiscal policy
in 2026. These demand forces are supporting output
while adding to the price pressures from the tariffs.
In the rest of the world, other drivers besides
tariffs—both temporary and structural—are at play
too. In China, the country hardest hit by US tariffs,
growth is projected to decline only modestly, owing
to a sharp depreciation of the real effective exchange
rate, a front-loaded surge in exports toward Asian and
European partners, and some fiscal expansion. In the
euro area, fiscal expansion in Germany has played a
role in boosting growth in 2025. Emerging market and
developing economies have benefited from easier financial conditions, on the back of a depreciated dollar.
They have also continued to demonstrate significant
resilience, in part because of strong and improving
policy frameworks, a theme explored in Chapter 2.
Incorrect also because, despite the offsets from
other drivers, the tariff shock is dimming lackluster
growth prospects. Global growth is projected to slow
in the second half of this year, with only a partial
recovery next year. Compared with the projections in
the October 2024 WEO, this results in a cumulative
global output loss of about 0.2 percent by the end of
2026. In the US, growth is revised down and inflation
is revised up compared with last year’s projections,
clearly suggesting a negative supply shock.
Thus, despite a steady first half, the outlook remains
insufficiently bright, with risks tilted to the downside.
These are some of the risks that are key to the balance
of the evolving outlook:
First, the current AI boom presents some parallels
with the dot-com boom of the late 1990s. Market
optimism about a new technology—the internet
then, AI now—is pushing up stock valuations, fueling

FOREWORD

a tech-centered investment boom, and sustaining
consumption on the back of strong capital gains. This
could push the neutral interest rate up. Should the
AI boom continue unabated, the risk is that demand
pressures accentuate further, requiring tighter policies.
Indeed, between June 1999 and May 2000, the Federal
Reserve needed to raise its policy rate by a cumulative
175 basis points to contain inflationary pressures.
But the risk is also that lofty profit expectations will
ultimately be unmet—as often happens when new
general-purpose technologies are introduced. A significant market repricing, explored in more detail in the
October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report, could
impact aggregate wealth and consumption and spill
over to broader financial markets.
Second, China’s prospects remain weak. More than
four years after the property bubble burst, the sector
has still not been put on a firm footing. Real estate
investment continues to shrink while the economy
teeters on the verge of a debt-deflation cycle. Even
more concerning, it is difficult to see how the strong
contribution of manufacturing exports to the country’s
growth can be sustained. The signs are mounting that
large-scale subsidies to the manufacturing sector have
reached their limit and are contributing to significant
misallocation of resources in the economy. This is
evident in the contrast between strong productivity
gains in some key industrial sectors, such as electric
vehicles and solar panels, and the absence of aggregate
productivity gains. As documented in Chapter 3, while
industrial policy is increasingly used by countries to
reshape their economies, this often comes with many
fiscal and hidden costs.
Third, countries need to seriously address the
strains on their public finances. With lower growth
prospects, higher real interest rates, more elevated
debt levels, and new spending needs for some countries on items such as defense or national security,
the fiscal equation is becoming more challenging to
solve and leaves countries vulnerable, should a large
external shock occur. All major advanced economies saw their spreads rise during the April sell-off,
and only a handful of safe haven countries, such as
Switzerland, experienced a pronounced fall in longer-term yields—reflecting broader fiscal concerns in
core bond markets. Low-income countries are even
more vulnerable, given reduced official aid flows. For
a rising number of countries, the lack of job opportunities could quickly translate into rising social unrest,

especially among an unemployed and disenfranchised
young population.
Fourth, we are witnessing increased pressure on
policy-setting institutions such as central banks.
Should these pressures succeed, many of the hard-won
credibility gains achieved in policymaking over many
decades could be lost. Trust in central banks and in
their ability to deliver price stability allows inflation
expectations to remain well anchored even when the
economy is hit by large shocks, such as during the
recent cost-of-living crisis, as previous WEO reports
have documented.
While downside risks dominate, all is not gloomy. A
few important upside risks could quickly brighten the
outlook. First, resolving and reducing policy uncertainty would provide a significant lift to the global
economy. The October 2025 WEO shows that a
material decrease in global economic policy uncertainty
as a result of clearer and more stable bilateral and
multilateral trade agreements can raise global output
by 0.4 percent in the very near term. Lowering tariffs
based on these agreements adds even more upside, of
about 0.3 percent. Second, AI, beyond its effects on
investment, could well improve total factor productivity. This WEO report finds that, under modest
assumptions, this factor could add another 0.4 percent
to global output in the near term.
This reiterates that policies can and should help
restore confidence and predictability, which would
improve growth prospects. For trade policy, the
objective should be to update trade rules to reflect the
changing nature of trade relations, looking to deepen
trade relations where possible.
Fiscal policy should aim to reduce fiscal vulnerabilities gradually and credibly. Improving the efficiency of
public spending is key and can help address crowding
in private investment, as discussed in the October
2025 Fiscal Monitor. Monetary policy should remain
tailored and transparent. Preserving the independence
of monetary policy institutions is a precondition for
macroeconomic stability. Technocratic institutions
should be allowed to focus on their core mandate and
provided with the tools to do so, including in terms of
data provision.
Efforts to improve longer-term prospects must
continue. While macroeconomic stability is a necessary
precondition, governments should ensure that private
entrepreneurs can innovate, thrive, and generate the
growth of tomorrow. While it might be tempting to

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

xiii

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

implement sectoral industrial policies, the evidence
suggests that their effectiveness can be very limited
and the side effects considerable. The use of horizontal policies should instead be preferred: investment in
education, public research, public infrastructure, good
governance, financial and macroeconomic stability, and
a regulatory environment that balances carefully the
need for flexibility and innovation in the private sector
and the need to contain risks.
Finally, work to strengthen the multilateral frameworks and institutions that have helped deliver
considerable gains over the past decades must continue.
If anything, an important reason for global resilience

xiv

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

so far is also that most countries have exercised
restraint in trade policy retaliation, have sought to
forge better trade deals, and are still operating under
well-established global trading norms. The recent geopolitical tensions highlight how the need for an adaptive and pragmatic multilateral system is even greater
than before. Because while it is easy to focus on the
short-term costs and interests, cooperation in the face
of global challenges remains the bedrock upon which to
build a more prosperous and resilient global economy.
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
Economic Counsellor

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The rules of the global economy are in flux. Details
of newly introduced policy measures are slowly coming
into focus, and growth prospects are shifting along
with them. After the United States introduced higher
tariffs starting in February, subsequent deals and resets
have tempered some extremes. But uncertainty about
the stability and trajectory of the global economy
remains acute. Meanwhile, substantial cuts to international development aid and new restrictions on
immigration have been rolled out in some advanced
economies. Several major economies have adopted a
more stimulative fiscal stance, raising concerns about
the sustainability of public finances and possible
cross-border spillovers. The world’s economies, institutions, and markets have been adjusting to a landscape
marked by greater protectionism and fragmentation,
with dim medium-term growth prospects and calling
for a recalibration of macroeconomic policies.
At the onset of trade policy shifts and the surge in
uncertainty, the April 2025 World Economic Outlook
(WEO) revised the 2025 global growth projection
downward by 0.5 percentage point to 2.8 percent.
This was predicated on tariffs being supply shocks for
tariff-imposing countries and demand shocks for the
targeted, with uncertainty being a negative demand
shock all around. By July, announcements that lowered
tariffs from their April highs prompted a modest
upward revision to 3.0 percent. Inflation projections,
while little changed overall, went up for the United
States and down for many other economies.
After a resilient start, the global economy is showing
signs of a moderate slowdown, as predicted. Incoming
data in the first half of 2025 showed robust activity.
Inflation in Asian economies was subdued, while it
remained steady in the United States. This apparent
resilience, however, seems to be largely attributable to
temporary factors—such as front-loading of trade and
investment and inventory management strategies—
rather than to fundamental strength. As these factors
fade, weaker data are surfacing. The front-loading
is unwinding, and labor markets are softening.
Pass-through of tariffs to US consumer prices, previously muted, appears increasingly likely. Advanced

economies, traditionally reliant on immigration, are
seeing sharp declines in net labor inflows, with implications for potential output.
Global growth is projected to slow from 3.3 percent
in 2024 to 3.2 percent in 2025 and to 3.1 percent
in 2026. This is an improvement relative to the July
WEO Update—but cumulatively 0.2 percentage point
below forecasts made before the policy shifts in the
October 2024 WEO, with the slowdown reflecting
headwinds from uncertainty and protectionism, even
though the tariff shock is smaller than originally
announced. On an end-of-year basis, global growth is
projected to slow down from 3.6 percent in 2024 to
2.6 percent in 2025. Advanced economies are forecast to grow about 1½ percent in 2025–26, with the
United States slowing to 2.0 percent. Emerging market
and developing economies are projected to moderate to
just above 4.0 percent. Inflation is expected to decline
to 4.2 percent globally in 2025 and to 3.7 percent in
2026, with notable variation: above-target inflation in
the United States—with risks tilted to the upside—
and subdued inflation in much of the rest of the
world. World trade volume is forecast to grow at an
average rate of 2.9 percent in 2025–26—boosted by
front-loading in 2025 yet still much slower than the
3.5 percent growth rate in 2024—with persistent trade
fragmentation limiting gains.
Risks to the outlook remain tilted to the downside,
as they were in previous WEO reports. Prolonged
policy uncertainty could dampen consumption
and investment. Further escalation of protectionist
measures, including nontariff barriers, could suppress
investment, disrupt supply chains, and stifle productivity growth. Larger-than-expected shocks to labor
supply, notably from restrictive immigration policies,
could reduce growth, especially in economies facing
aging populations and skill shortages. Fiscal vulnerabilities and financial market fragilities may interact
with rising borrowing costs and increased rollover
risks for sovereigns. An abrupt repricing of tech stocks
could be triggered by disappointing results on earnings
and productivity gains related to artificial intelligence
(AI), marking an end to the AI investment boom and

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

xv

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

the associated exuberance of financial markets, with
the possibility of broader implications for macrofinancial stability. Pressure on the independence of key
economic institutions, such as central banks, could
erode hard-earned policy credibility and undermine
sound economic decision making, including as a
result of reduced data reliability. Commodity price
spikes—stemming from climate shocks or geopolitical tensions—pose additional risks, especially for
low-income, commodity-importing countries. On the
upside, a breakthrough in trade negotiations could
lower tariffs and reduce uncertainty. Renewed reform
momentum in an effort to navigate the intensifying
challenges could give a boost to medium-term growth.
Faster productivity growth because of AI could bring
economy-wide gains.
The task ahead is to restore confidence through
credible, predictable, and sustainable policy actions.
Policymakers should establish clear, transparent, and
rules-based trade policy road maps to reduce uncertainty and support investment and to reap the productivity and growth benefits that more trade brings.
Trade rules should be modernized for the digital age
and offer opportunities for stronger multilateral cooperation. Pairing trade diplomacy with macroeconomic
adjustment is crucial for correcting persistent external
imbalances by addressing their underlying causes and
securing lasting gains. Rebuilding fiscal buffers and
safeguarding debt sustainability remain a priority.

xvi

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Medium-term fiscal consolidation should involve
realistic, balanced plans that combine spending rationalization and revenue generation. Any new support
measures should be temporary, well-targeted, and offset
by clear savings. Monetary policy should be calibrated
to balance price stability and growth risks, in line with
central banks’ mandates. Preserving the independence
of central banks remains critical for anchoring inflation expectations and enabling them to achieve their
mandates. As Chapter 2 shows, past actions to improve
policy frameworks have served emerging market and
developing economies well in increasing resilience
to risk-off shocks. Countries should embrace reform
without any further delay to enhance resilience as a
new global economic landscape takes shape. Efforts
on structural reforms—promoting labor mobility,
encouraging workforce participation, investing in digitalization, and strengthening institutions—should be
redoubled now to lift growth prospects. As Chapter 3
demonstrates, industrial policy may have a role in
improving resilience and growth, but full consideration
should be given to opportunity costs and trade-offs
involved in its use. For low-income countries, mobilizing domestic resources, including through governance
and administrative reforms, is essential as external aid
declines. In times of uncertainty, scenario planning and
predesigned policy playbooks can improve preparedness and credibility, ensuring that policy responses are
both effective and timely.

CHAPTER

1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

A New Global Economic Landscape
Slowly Takes Shape
The year 2025 has been fluid and volatile, with
much of the dynamics driven by a reordering of policy
priorities in the United States and the adaptation of
policies in the other economies to new realities. Trade
news has dominated the headlines, and, along with
them, perceived prospects for the global economy have
fluctuated. As observed in the April 2025 World Economic Outlook (WEO), a series of new tariff measures
by the United States lifted tariff rates to levels not seen
in a century. Countermeasures by US trading partners
were limited, barely moving the effective tariff rate
on US exports. A flurry of announcements followed,
including trade deals between the United States and
several of its trading partners and a reset to higher
tariff rates for countries without a trade deal (see the
WTO-IMF Tariff Tracker for a summary). As a whole,
the announcements brought down the US effective
tariff rates from their April highs, gravitating toward
a range between 10 percent and 20 percent for most
countries (Figure 1.1). Nonetheless, tariffs are very far
from falling back to their 2024 levels. Trade policy
uncertainty remains elevated in the absence of clear,
transparent, and durable agreements among trading
partners—and with attention starting to shift from
the eventual level of tariffs to their impact on prices,
investment, and consumption (Figure 1.2).
There have also been changes in other policy
domains. On the international side, sizable cuts in
development aid and more restrictive stances on
immigration have been introduced. Official development assistance dropped by 9 percent in 2024 and,
based on announced cuts by major donors, a drop
of similar magnitude is expected in 2025 (OECD
2025). Low-income developing countries face the
largest impact, although with different effects among
members of this group. Meanwhile, net migration into
several advanced economies that have been traditional
recipients of migrant inflows has declined sharply. On
the domestic side, in major economies—most notably,
the United States—a shift toward a more stimulative fiscal stance, including from changes in defense

spending in some cases, has also raised concerns about
the lack of adjustment toward more sustainable public
finances and has broad cross-border spillovers. Meanwhile, progress on long-overdue growth-enhancing
structural reforms continues to be stalled.
As the new landscape takes shape, the world is
adapting. The evolution of WEO projections painted
a picture of a significant, though not massive, impact
of shifting policies on the economic outlook. The tariff
shock in April and the associated uncertainty with
which it unfolded prompted a downward revision of
the global growth projection for 2025, by 0.5 percentage point to 2.8 percent, in the April 2025 WEO.
In the July 2025 WEO Update, it was mainly the
lowering of tariff rates and the implications thereof for
uncertainty and financial conditions that drove a modest 0.2 percentage point upward revision of the 2025
global growth projection to 3.0 percent. Global inflation projections were revised little in April and July,
but revisions in different directions across countries
offset each other. Specifically, inflation forecasts were
revised upward in the United States but downward in
many other jurisdictions, consistent with the expectation that the shifting international trade landscape
would imply a supply shock in the tariffing country
and a demand shock in the tariffed countries.
To date, more protectionist trade measures have
had a limited impact on economic activity and prices.
Growth held up in the first half of the year, with yearover-year quarterly annualized growth rates persisting
at about 3½ percent. Inflation has shown more mixed
signals. Globally, sequential headline and core inflation
edged up. Relative to WEO projections, inflation readings surprised on the upside in Mexico and the United
Kingdom. By contrast, inflation in India, Malaysia, the
Philippines, and Thailand surprised on the downside.
In China, inflation developments were broadly in
line with expectations, with consumer price inflation
remaining at very low levels and producer price inflation continuing to be negative. In the United States,
headline inflation held steady, driven by moderating
price increases in core services and with disinflationary
dynamics in goods prices receding.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

1

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 1.1. US Effective Tariff Rates by Country

Figure 1.2. Overall, Economic Policy, and Trade Policy
Uncertainty

(Percent)

(Index)

World

120,000

China
Türkiye
India
Brazil
Japan
European Union
MENA

100,000

End 2024
April 2025 WEO
July 2025 WEO Update
October 2025 WEO

United Kingdom
Sub-Saharan Africa
Canada
Mexico
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Sources: US International Trade Commission; WTO-IMF Tariff Tracker; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The effective tariff rate is a weighted average of announced statutory rates.
MENA = Middle East and North Africa; WEO = World Economic Outlook; WTO = World
Trade Organization.

The unexpected resilience in activity and muted
inflation response reflect—in addition to the fact that
the tariff shock has turned out to be smaller than
originally announced—a range of factors that provide
temporary relief, rather than underlying strength in
economic fundamentals. Households and businesses
front-loaded their consumption and investment in
anticipation of higher tariffs. This gave a temporary
boost to global activity in early 2025. Trade flows
started adjusting, with diversion to third countries captured in high-frequency data. At the same time, implementation delays in newly announced tariffs allowed
firms to postpone price increases, as they waited for
clarity on when and by how much tariffs on certain
goods from certain countries would increase. Inventory
buildup and its subsequent drawdown, presales, orders
put on hold or goods placed in bonded warehouses,
and infrequent pricing because of long-term contracts
also slowed the pace of pass-through of rising costs
(Bauer, Haltom, and Martin 2025). Healthy profit
margins in the wake of the inflation surge following
the COVID-19 pandemic provided buffers for
suppliers in source countries and importers in destination countries to absorb the higher tariffs. Rather
than appreciating, as happened in previous episodes
of trade tensions, the US dollar depreciated, reflecting
increased hedging demand by non-US investors and a
potential market reassessment of the dollar’s bull run
over the past decade (October 2025 Global Financial
2

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

1,200

World Uncertainty Index (WUI)
EPU (right scale)
TPU (right scale)

1,000

80,000

800

60,000

600

40,000

400

20,000

200

0
Jan.
2015

Jan.
17

Jan.
19

Jan.
21

Jan.
23

0
Aug.
25

Sources: Ahir, Bloom, and Furceri 2022; Caldara and others 2020; Davis 2016; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: The uncertainty measures are news- and media-outlet-based indices that quantify
media attention to global news related to overall uncertainty (WUI), economic policy
uncertainty (EPU), and trade policy uncertainty (TPU).

Stability Report). While a weaker dollar amplified the
tariff shock, it also supported global trade, contributed
to favorable global financial conditions, and eliminated
inflationary pressure from exchange rate pass-through,
hence providing policymakers (especially those in
emerging market and developing economies) with
room to support their economies.
There are increasing signs that the adverse effects of
protectionist measures are starting to show. Patterns
in net exports and inventories driven by front-loading
behavior have largely reversed. Core inflation has risen
in the United States, and unemployment has edged
up. Inflation is stabilizing above central bank targets
in several other countries, and inflation expectations
are still fragile, worsening the trade-offs for monetary
policymakers as uncertainty and tariffs start weighing
on activity.
As the global economy slides into a more fragmented landscape, risks to the outlook increase. The
tactics that keep activity seemingly resilient in the
short term, such as trade diversion and rerouting,
are costly. Suboptimal reallocation of productive
resources, technological decoupling, and limitations
on knowledge diffusion are bound to restrain growth
over the longer term. More restrictive stances on the
cross-border flow of labor add to pressure on countries already facing challenges from aging populations

CHAPTER 1

(see Chapter 2 of the April 2025 WEO) and would
entail output declines on a global scale over the longer
term (Chapter 3 of the April 2025 WEO). Dim
medium-term growth prospects amplify concerns
about fiscal sustainability. The scaling back of international aid worsens these dynamics for the most vulnerable countries while eroding standards of living and,
paradoxically, strengthening incentives for migration in
source countries.

Recent Developments: Resilience Giving
Way to Warning Signs
Slowing Activity
The global economy has shown resilience to the
trade policy shocks, including because these shocks
materialized on a smaller scale than expected at their
onset, but the drag from shifting policies is becoming
visible in more recent data. There have been several
common drivers of growth patterns across countries
but also some important idiosyncratic factors.
The last round of tariffs came in as the US economy
started to show signs of a material slowdown. GDP
grew at an annualized 3.8 percent in the second quarter of 2025, but mainly because imports and inventories fully reversed the outturn observed in the first
quarter, which had seen a contraction of –0.6 percent.
Investment slowed, with a reduction in spending on
commercial and residential construction and broader
weakness masked by a surge in spending on equipment and intellectual property, including those related
to AI. The jobs reports since July were much weaker
than expected, with significant decline in the number
of jobs added. The unemployment rate edged up to
4.3 percent in August. Signs of slowing activity and
a weakening labor market appeared in the context
of ongoing shifts in labor supply. Net international
migration flows plunged in the first half of 2025 and,
if the current trends continue, it could imply about
1.0–1.6 million fewer immigrants than in 2024 and
2.5 million fewer than in 2023 (Duzhak and NewSchmidt 2025).
Other major economies are showing signs of waning
of the front-loading that drove stronger-than-expected
outcomes in the first quarter of 2025. Growth in
China in the second quarter slowed to 4.2 percent
from 6.1 percent in the first quarter (based on staff
seasonally adjusted estimates), with the contribution of
net exports receding. This partly offset the acceleration
in domestic demand, possibly driven by policy stimu-

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

lus. High-frequency indicators point to a deceleration
in economic activity in July and August. In the
euro area, GDP growth slowed to 0.5 percent, from
2.3 percent in the first quarter. Declines in growth
rates were recorded in Germany and Italy, as well as
in Ireland, which had disproportionately contributed
to euro area growth in the first quarter, with export
performance driven by pharmaceutical sector transactions, partly as a result of front-loading. In Japan, the
economy grew at an annualized rate of 2.2 percent in
the second quarter, accelerating from 0.3 percent in
the first quarter. In addition to solid capital spending,
this was propelled by strong exports, especially of cars.
However, new export orders fell in July, for the first
time since December, and export values dropped, led
by sectors most affected by tariffs.
The composition of contributions to GDP growth
in major economies indicates few signs of underlying
strength in demand. It clearly illustrates the distortions
in trade flows in the past few quarters (Figure 1.3).
Importantly, consumption growth has been subdued
in all key jurisdictions. And investment has weakened,
notwithstanding bursts of activity before the tariff
news in April. This is broadly in line with depressed
consumer and business confidence (Figure 1.4).
Beyond China, emerging market and developing
economies more broadly showed strength, sometimes because of particular domestic reasons, but
recent signals point to a fragile outlook there as well.
Growth for the group of emerging market economies
excluding China was stronger than expected in the
first half of 2025, thanks in part to record agricultural output in Brazil, robust service sector expansion
in India, and resilient domestic demand in Türkiye.
The stronger-than-expected economic performance
adds to a more general trend of resilience in emerging
markets, which originates in improvements in domestic institutions and favorable external conditions (see
Chapter 2). However, external conditions are becoming more challenging, and in some cases, domestic
momentum is slowing. For instance, in Brazil, signs
of moderation are appearing amid tight monetary and
fiscal policies. Higher tariffs imposed by the United
States are curtailing external demand, with profound
implications for several large export-oriented economies, while heightened trade policy uncertainty is
dampening firms’ appetite for investment. At the same
time, constrained fiscal space is reducing governments’
ability to stimulate domestic demand where needed.
Among the group of low-income countries, some of
the world’s poorest economies continue to see feeble
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

3

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 1.4. Consumer and Business Confidence

Figure 1.3. Contributions to Quarterly GDP Growth

(Index, OECD harmonized)

(Percent, quarter over quarter, annualized)
Private consumption
Investment
GDP growth

United States

Public consumption
Net exports

104

6

102

4

100

2

96

−2

94

−4
2023:Q1

23:Q3

24:Q1

24:Q3

25:Q2

6 2. Euro Area

92
Jan.
2014

Jan.
18

Jan.
20

Jan.
22

Jan.
24

Aug.
25

Jan.
20

Jan.
22

Jan.
24

Aug.
25

104

2

102

0

100

−2

98
2023:Q1

23:Q3

24:Q1

24:Q3

25:Q2

96
94
92
Jan.
2014

6 3. Japan
4
2

Jan.
16

Jan.
18

Sources: OECD; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: An indicator above 100 signals a boost in confidence; below 100 indicates
a pessimistic view. The rest of the world (ROW) represents the average value for
data across 22 economies. OECD = Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development.

0
−2
−4
2023:Q1

23:Q3

24:Q1

24:Q3

25:Q2

12 4. China
8
4
0
−4
−8

Jan.
16

106 2. Business Confidence

4

−6

ROW

98

0

−4

Euro area

106 1. Consumer Confidence

8 1. UnitedStates

−6

China

2023:Q1

23:Q3

24:Q1

24:Q3

25:Q2

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figures are calculated using seasonally adjusted series. Residuals are included in
the investment contribution.

growth—about 2 percentage points lower than other
peers in this group—adversely affected by a dearth
of external financing flows and cuts to international
aid. Other fragile countries, caught up in internal
4

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

or regional conflicts, are falling even more behind
(Chabert and Powell 2025).
Renewed economic fears, especially in the United
States, briefly set a risk-off tone in financial markets
(October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report).
Global equity indices declined in early August following the US jobs report, and US Treasury yields
plunged. Still, these movements were reversed quickly.
Equity prices rallied in one of the fastest recoveries on
record. At least so far, markets have taken the changes
in trade and fiscal policies mostly in stride, despite
recent steepening of the US yield curve. Global financial conditions remain accommodative by historical
standards. Much of the year’s equity market gains has
come from a rally in artificial intelligence (AI) stocks.
The stretched valuations and calm relative to the
challenges raise the risk of market volatility and asset
price correction should uncertainty start biting and

CHAPTER 1

economic indicators, including productivity gains from
generative AI investments, start to disappoint. The
decline in aggregate investment could be rather sharp,
given that investment in data centers and AI was a
significant contributor to investment growth recently.
Uncertainty Impact Still in the Pipeline
Several factors explain why the impact of higher
uncertainty may have been delayed or mitigated.
Uncertainty, acting as a negative demand shock, typically starts weighing on activity almost immediately.
Its effect continues to build over time and eventually
disappears as uncertainty lifts. Empirical estimates
suggest that a one-standard-deviation increase in
economic policy uncertainty leads to a 2 percent drop
in investment, peaking about two years after the shock
and fading in about three years (Londono, Ma, and
Wilson 2025). Estimates for trade policy uncertainty
range between 0.7 percent and 2 percent, peaking in
the first couple of quarters and fading in the second
year. So far, at the current juncture, the behavior of
investment seems to be on the upper end of standard
confidence bands.
There are two main channels through which the
negative effects of uncertainty materialize. First, under
the classic real-options mechanism (Bernanke 1983),
firms defer irreversible projects when the outlook is
clouded because waiting is cheaper than committing
to a potentially costly mistake. Households display a
similar pattern, postponing durable purchases while
maintaining spending on essentials. A second channel operates through precautionary behavior. When
perceived income risk increases, households save more,
thereby softening consumption growth (Bansal and
Yaron 2004).
Yet these need not translate into weaker output in the
near term. Front-loading to avoid what potentially will
be higher prices resulting from future tariffs is a clear
force temporarily offsetting the wait-and-see and precautionary motives. At the same time, firms may choose
to keep prices unchanged and absorb higher costs in
margins to retain their customer base while waiting
for uncertainty to lift. Strategic complementarities—
whereby pricing decisions of one firm strengthen the
incentive for other firms to take similar action—may
reinforce such short-term stickiness in prices.
The Brexit experience is a case in point. Measures of
uncertainty rose sharply before the 2016 referendum.
Business investment continued to grow in the period
immediately following the UK’s withdrawal from the

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.5. Impulse Responses to a Tariff-Uncertainty Shock
(Percent deviations from the stochastic steady state)
0.10 1. Output and Imports

Output
Imports

0.05
0
−0.05
−0.10
−0.15

0

2

4

6

8

10
Quarter

12

14

16

18

20

4

6

8

10
Quarter

12

14

16

18

20

0.08 2. Inflation
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
−0.02

0

2

Sources: Ghironi and Ozhan, forthcoming; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows impulse responses of selected variables for the tariff-imposing
economy to a tariff-uncertainty shock. Solid lines show a shock that materializes in the
first quarter (”realized uncertainty”), and dashed lines show a news shock announced
in the first quarter that materializes in the fourth quarter. Inflation is annualized.

European Union and started to fall steadily only beginning in 2018 (BOE 2019).
Tariff uncertainty moves activity mainly across
time—front-loading provides a brief offset, but once it
fades, uncertainty acts as a drag on demand. To illustrate the mechanisms in play, tariff-uncertainty shocks
are examined in isolation from tariffs themselves in
an open-economy New Keynesian model (Ghironi
and Ozhan, forthcoming). Two exercises consider
temporary increases in uncertainty about import
tariffs (Figure 1.5). In the first exercise (solid lines),
uncertainty rises on impact. Given a wider distribution
of tariffs, agents try to avoid potentially larger price
changes by front-loading imports, temporarily lifting
output. Faced with uncertainty about costs, firms raise
prices to protect margins, generating a small, shortlived increase in consumer price inflation. Once the
front-loading effect fades, uncertainty operates like a
negative demand shock—activity softens and inflation
eases as firms compress margins.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

5

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

In the second exercise (dashed lines), agents receive
news today that tariff uncertainty is going to rise
later—akin to pauses or deadline extensions that push
uncertainty into the future. Front-loading of imports
is similar, but now it is motivated by anticipated larger
potential price changes in the future rather than an
immediate increase in the variation of costs. Because
the timing of uncertainty is known (for example, the
expiration of a pause, the date for a bilateral negotiation meeting), firms can plan: They build inventories
and reprice slowly. Hence, when uncertainty is known
to increase in the future, inflation increases in gradual
increments and may look like it is more stubborn than
when uncertainty increases right away (though less
pronounced in magnitude).

Rising Prices in the United States?
To date, the impact of tariffs and associated rewiring
of supply chains on inflationary pressures remains
muted. In the tariffing country—the United States—
headline and core inflation have ticked up only
slightly (Figure 1.6). A deeper look into core inflation,
however, reveals a more visible climb in core goods
prices in the United States, but not in other countries
(blue line in Figure 1.6, panel 3). Notably, this climb
occurred at a time of persistent services inflation.
The muted response to date could also mean
delayed pass-through. Indeed, stockpiling and tariff
pauses, among other factors such as trade diversion
and rerouting, mean that the actual effective tariff
rate—that is, the actual duty paid on imports at
customs as a share of the value of imports—lagged
the effective rate based on the announcements and
calculated as a weighted average of statutory rates using
pre-substitution trade weights (Figure 1.7, panel 1). An
examination of certain categories of goods suggests that
very little of what would be expected to pass through
to consumer prices has actually passed through so
far (Figure 1.7, panel 2). Household appliances, for
instance, have reflected the cost of tariffs, but many
categories, including food and clothing, have not.
High-frequency retail pricing data indicate that, in
categories with exposure to tariffs, the prices of both
imported and domestic goods are affected (Cavallo,
Llamas, and Vazquez 2025). This suggests broader
pricing and supply-chain spillovers. Although firms in
the United States enjoyed higher profitability after the
pandemic shock, they may not be able to absorb the
cost increases that result from the tariff hikes and the

6

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 1.6. Global Inflation Trends
(Percent, year over year)

United States
China
16 1. Headline Inflation
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
−2
Jan.
Jan.
Jan.
2019
20
21

Euro area
Other EMDEs

Other AEs

Jan.
22

Jan.
23

Jan.
24

Jan.
25

Aug.
25

Jan.
22

Jan.
23

Jan.
24

Jan.
25

Aug.
25

Jan.
21

Jan.
22

Jan.
23

Jan.
24

Jan.
25

Aug.
25

Jan.
21

Jan.
22

Jan.
23

Jan.
24

Jan.
25

Aug.
25

15 2. Core Inflation
12
9
6
3
0
−3
Jan.
2019

Jan.
20

Jan.
21

15 3. Core Goods Inflation
12
9
6
3
0
−3
Jan.
2019

Jan.
20

15 4. Services Inflation
12
9
6
3
0
−3
Jan.
2019

Jan.
20

Sources: Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panels 1 and 2 plot the median of a sample of 57 economies that account for
78 percent of the 2024 world GDP (in weighted purchasing-power-parity terms) in
the World Economic Outlook. The bands depict the 25th to 75th percentiles of data
across economies. “Core inflation” is the percent change in the consumer price index
for goods and services, excluding food and energy (or the closest available measure).
AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.7. Impact of Tariffs on Prices
25 1. US Global Tariff Rate
(Percent)
Eﬀective tariﬀ rate
Actual tariﬀ rate

20
15
10
5
0
Jan.
2025

Feb.
25

Mar.
25

Apr.
25

May
25

10 2. Inflation Pass-Through
(Percent)
8

Jun.
25

Jul.
25

Aug.
25

Direct
Indirect
PCE prices Feb.–Jul. 2025

6
4
2

Children’s cl.

Sports vehicles

Jewelry

Furniture

Motor vehicles

Sporting equip.

Therapeutic app.

Glassware

Women’s cl.

Other cl.

Men’s cl.

Luggage

Musical inst.

HH app.

−2

Core goods

0

Sources: Haver Analytics; US International Trade Commission; WTO-IMF Tariff Tracker;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, actual tariff rate is the actual duty paid on imports at customs as
a share of the value of imports, and the effective tariff rate is a weighted average of
announced statutory rates using pre-tariff (hence, pre-substitution) import weights.
Actual rate may be biased downward if a product is misclassified or under-invoiced
or if tariffs are prohibitively high. In panel 2, the full pass-through is estimated using
country- and product-specific tariffs and direct and indirect import intensities from
the input-output tables and personal consumption expenditure (PCE) bridge. The
estimates assume that margins are unchanged and there are no offsetting effects
from factors such as the exchange rate. app. = appliances; cl. = clothing; equip. =
equipment; HH = household; inst. = instruments; WTO = World Trade Organization.

rewiring of global value chains and may, at some point,
start to pass on cost increases to consumers (see also
the October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report for
an analysis of implications of higher tariffs for corporate earnings and debt-servicing capacity).
One crucial point about the assessment of recent
price developments is the movement of the US dollar.
A well-established finding regarding tariffs is that
the currency of a tariff-imposing country appreciates
(Mundell 1960; Jeanne and Son 2024). On the one
hand, with the currency appreciation, the direct impact
of tariffs on prices through higher import prices
would be somewhat mitigated. On the other hand,

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

prolonged currency appreciation could offset the direct
improvement in trade balances from tariffs—hence
leaving trade balances mostly unchanged—and hamper
economic activity. This so-called exchange rate offset
has been largely absent in the current episode, with the
US dollar (the currency of the tariff-imposing country)
weakening markedly in April and May and staying
mostly stable at the weaker level since then, unlike
in the 2018–19 episode (Figure 1.8, panel 1). Interestingly, the aggregate US ex-tariff import price has
remained broadly stable since April 2025 (Figure 1.8,
panel 2).
The relative lack of movement in US import prices
is set in the context of the notable increase in the
average effective tariff rate and the sharp depreciation of the US dollar during this time. In a standard
setting, the dollar appreciation boosts the margin of
exporters, especially if they invoice in dollars, as is
common practice. Hence, they have room to absorb
some of the tariffs without a deterioration in profitability. And, if they are absorbing the tariffs, import
prices decline. This time around, the depreciation of
the dollar makes matters more challenging. Under
dominant currency pricing, a weaker dollar directly
reduces the margin of exporters, separately from the
tariffs. Furthermore, the universal nature of the tariffs
may make margin reduction less likely, as exporters,
who know their competitors are also tariffed, will be
reluctant to cut margins.
The lack of a decline in import prices this time—at
least to date—indicates that exporters on the whole
have not absorbed tariffs through markups or export
price adjustment, leaving US firms and households to
bear the burden. But the aggregate price movements
may mask important variations in US sectoral import
prices, considering the varying intensity of tariffs across
goods, as well as factors such as demand elasticity and
pricing power. For instance, the US import price of
capital goods has increased significantly, consistent
with recovering some of the margin lost to depreciation of the US dollar, whereas that of automobiles—
in one of the hardest-hit sectors—has seen only a
moderate increase since April. For exporting countries,
some sectors appear to be more sensitive to tariffs than
others in terms of export prices. For instance, in Japan
the export price of standard passenger cars bound for
North America has plummeted more than 20 percent,
while that of cars bound for the rest of the world has
remained stable, where both are invoiced in US dollars
(Figure 1.8, panel 3). A similar pattern is observed for

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

7

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 1.8. Tariﬀs, US Dollar, and Prices

margin pressures. When firms’ pricing decisions are
based on beliefs about when competitors will be raising
prices, the price increases tend to be gradual, rather
than a one-off jump. That said, an appreciation of the
dollar—which has been range-bound recently—may
put the exchange rate offset back in action to mitigate
the impact of tariffs on US consumer prices.

(Index)

104 1. US NEER and Terms of Trade
102
100
98
96
94
92
90
−25

−20

2018 tariﬀ episode: NEER
2018 tariﬀ episode: TOT

2025 tariﬀ episode: NEER
2025 tariﬀ episode: TOT

−15

5

−10

−5

0
Weeks

10

15

Evolving External Balances

20

25

4

5

102 2. US Import Prices Excluding Fuels
2018 tariﬀ episode
2025 tariﬀ episode

101
100
99
98
−6

−5

−4

−3

−2

−1
0
Months

1

2

3

120 3. Japanese Export Price: Standard Passenger Cars
110
100
Export to North America
Export to rest of the world

90
80
Jun.
2024

Sep.
24

Dec.
24

Mar.
25

Jun.
25

Aug.
25

Sources: Bank of Japan; Federal Reserve Board; US Bureau of Labor Statistics; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: In panels 1 and 2, week and month 0 for the 2018 tariff episode correspond to
the week and month of July 6, when the US imposed a 25 percent tariff on $34 billion
in Chinese goods, and China implemented a 25 percent tariff on $34 billion in US
goods. For the 2025 tariff episode, week and month 0 correspond to April 4, following
the April 2 “Liberation Day” announcement. In panel 2, the import prices include
the transaction value of the goods and the value of services performed to deliver the
goods from the border of the exporting country to the border of the importing country,
hence they include cost, insurance, and freight but not tariffs. In panel 3, the base
year is 2020, and the exports are recorded at border values. NEER = nominal effective
exchange rate; TOT = terms of trade.

Korea’s automobile export prices. In contrast, export
prices of German cars sold to non-EU countries have
remained relatively stable so far. Exporters may not be
able to maintain lower prices for much longer, given
8

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Global trade activity was robust in the first quarter
of 2025, driven by strong growth in US imports and
in exports from Asia and the euro area because of
front-loading in anticipation of higher tariffs in the
United States. Some of this strength could be related
to a weaker dollar (Boz and others 2020). Subsequent
higher-frequency data show signs of deceleration in
the second quarter. Goods exports to the United
States from major European economies—particularly
Germany, Spain, and the United Kingdom—have
fallen notably. Total euro area exports remain resilient, however, supported by larger trade flows within
Europe. In China, the decline in exports to the United
States has been partly offset by higher exports to the
euro area and countries in the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN), in part supported by the
depreciation of the renminbi against most currencies
(excluding the US dollar). Bilateral trade decoupling
between the United States and China appears to be
happening sooner when compared with the 2018–19
tariff shock (see Box 1.1).
Along with changes in the global trade landscape
and other policy shifts, current account balances for
the world’s largest economies have also evolved. The
US current account deficit was 4.6 percent of GDP in
the first half of 2025, 1.9 percentage points wider than
the 2013–24 average, mainly reflecting an increase in
goods imports. The euro area current account surplus
stood at 1.9 percent of GDP in the first half of 2025
compared with 3 percent over the same period in 2024
and 2.3 percent during 2013–24, largely as a result
of an increase in the primary income deficit. Current
account surpluses stood at 3.2 percent of GDP in
China and 4.7 percent of GDP in Japan, which are
larger than in the same period of 2024 and when compared with the historical averages during 2013–24.
While witnessing some improvement in the first
quarter of 2025, the net international investment
position (NIIP) of the United States has generally
seen a stronger rise in US liabilities in recent years

CHAPTER 1

as the economy continues to attract record inflows
of foreign direct investment (April 2025 WEO), as
well as inflows into equities and US Treasuries. By
contrast, the euro area’s and Japan’s NIIP continue to
see assets building faster than liabilities. For China,
low-frequency trends indicate relative stability in the
NIIP.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Figure 1.9. Fiscal Policy
6 1. Primary Balance
(Percent of GDP)
3
0
−3
−6

Against the backdrop of slowing global growth and
varying domestic inflation developments, policy space
is constrained and vulnerabilities are high.
Fiscal policy remains too loose in many of the
largest advanced and developing economies. Even
though 2025 projected primary deficits in most cases
are lower than the record-setting deficits of 2020–21,
when large fiscal stimulus packages were deployed to
counter the pandemic shock, they remain sizably larger
than prior to the pandemic, except in Brazil and India
(Figure 1.9, panel 1). In China, the fiscal policy stance
remains appropriately expansionary, given the weakness
in domestic demand, but marks a continued departure
from the stance that is needed to avoid rising debt to
GDP over the medium term.
Stabilizing debt to GDP at its 2024 level requires
significant consolidation for most countries. In other
words, given the projected primary balances for 2025,
debt ratios are set to rise, and in some cases—Brazil,
China, France, and the United States—significantly
so. Further, globally, the level of debt under an
extreme adverse scenario would be even higher (see
assessment based on the debt-at-risk framework in the
October 2024 Fiscal Monitor). Spending pressures from
aging populations, defense, and energy security add to
the risks, especially in Europe.
The calculus of postpandemic debt sustainability is
complicated by elevated debt ratios, worsening primary
balances, higher interest rates, and a weakening growth
outlook. As policy rates were hiked in light of the
inflation surge in 2021–22, interest rates at the short
end of the yield curve were suddenly much higher
and contributed significantly to the rising cost of debt
servicing. Since the end of 2023, mid-segment yields
and those at the long end have also crept upward
(Figure 1.9, panel 2).
The overall rising cost of borrowing is a reason for
concern—particularly given the significant refinancing requirements, as a share of GDP, for some of the

−9
−12
3
2

USA

GBR

FRA

DEU

ITA

BRA

IND

CHN

2. Real Long-Term Interest Rates
(Percent, year over year)

1

United States
Japan

Euro area
United Kingdom

0
−1
−2
−3
2015:
Q1

Share of Treasury bill issuance in
gross borrowing (percent)

Policy Mix: Loose Fiscal and Divergent
Monetary

2015–19
2020–21
2025 (projected)
2025 (DSPB)

17:
Q1

19:
Q1

21:
Q1

23:
Q1

25:
Q2

90 3. 2024 Debt Maturity and Short-Maturity Debt Financing
(Percent)
80
70
USA (30.9)
60
50
FRA (12.2)
40
DEU (7.1)
GBR (7.0)
30
JPN (26.2)
20
ITA (18.1)
10
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Average term to maturity of outstanding debt (years)

Sources: Consensus Economics; Eurostat; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the debt-stabilizing primary balance (DSPB) is calculated as the
primary balance required to stabilize the debt given projected effective interest rate on
debt and GDP growth, and accounting for stock-flow adjustments. In panel 2, the real
long-term interest rate is calculated as the nominal yield on 10-year government bonds
minus 10-year-ahead expected inflation from Consensus Economics. In panel 3, bubble
size and labels refer to countries’ refinancing requirements as a share of GDP. Country
labels in the figure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) codes.

largest economies (Figure 1.9, panel 3). In addition,
increased reliance on financing through Treasury
bills—short-term debt securities with maturity of one
year or less—tends to shorten average debt maturity
over time and increasingly exposes governments to
refinancing risks or fluctuations in short-term interest
rates. Emerging markets with weaker credit ratings and
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

9

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

low-income economies face challenging conditions in
bond markets (Chapter 1 of the October 2025 Global
Financial Stability Report).
Globally, monetary policy’s shift from aggressive
tightening to a more nuanced stance leaning toward
easing or neutral continues. In some of these countries
where the fiscal policy stance is loosening, the monetary policy rate is expected to remain steady. But the
high uncertainty could prompt fluctuations in interest
rates. Concerns about excessive market volatility arising
from sovereign refinancing risks make it a challenge for
central banks to maintain both price and financial stability (Chapter 2 of the October 2024 Global Financial
Stability Report).
At the same time, monetary policy stances are
bound to become more divergent. While this reflects
differing inflation outlooks and central banks’ reaction
to domestic economic developments within their mandate, it may lead to sharp movements in exchange rates
as markets reassess relative currency values.

The Outlook: Dim Prospects
Looking past apparent resilience resulting from
trade-related distortions in some of the incoming data
and whipsawing growth forecasts from wild swings
in trade policies, the outlook for the global economy
continues to point to dim prospects, both in the short
and the long term.

Figure 1.10. Global Assumptions
110 1. Energy and Food Prices
(Index, 2024:Q4 = 100)
105
100
95
90
85

Energy
Food and beverages

80
2024:
Q4

25:
Q2

26:
Q4

United States
Euro area
Japan

4
3
2
1
0
2024:
Q4

25:
Q4

26:
Q4

27:
Q4

28:
Q4

29:
Q4

0.6 3. Fiscal Policy Projections
(Percentage points, change in fiscal balance)
0.3
0
−0.3

The baseline forecasts are predicated on several projections for global commodity prices, interest rates, and
fiscal and trade policies (Figure 1.10). Box 1.2 assesses
the impact on growth and inflation of plausible deviations from the baseline assumptions.
• Commodity price projections: Prices of fuel commodities are projected to decline in 2025 by 7.9 percent
and in 2026 by 3.7 percent. This is driven by a
decline in oil prices, although at a slower pace than
assumed in the April 2025 WEO. The oil futures
curve suggests that the petroleum spot price index
is expected to average $68.90 a barrel in 2025 and
decrease to $67.30 by 2030. Barring the temporary
spike related to the Israel-Iran war in mid-June,
prices have traded in the $60–$70 range established since the start of the accelerated production
schedule of OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum

−0.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

26:
Q2

6 2. Monetary Policy Projections
(Percent, quarterly average)
5

Global Assumptions

10

25:
Q4

2024

25
26
27
Advanced economies

28

2024

25
26
27
Emerging market and
developing economies

28

Source: IMF staﬀ calculations.
Note: In panels 1 and 2, solid lines denote projections from the October 2025 World
Economic Outlook (WEO) and dashed lines those from the April 2025 WEO. In panel 3,
the fiscal balance used is the general government structural primary balance in percent
of potential GDP. The structural primary balance is the cyclically adjusted primary
balance excluding net interest payments and corrected for a broader range of
noncyclical factors such as changes in asset and commodity prices.

Exporting Countries plus selected nonmember countries, including Russia) in April. Nonfuel commodity
prices are projected to increase by 7.4 percent in
2025 and by 4.1 percent in 2026. This implies a
slightly lower path than assumed in April, driven
by lower projected food and beverage prices, with

CHAPTER 1

wheat, rice, coffee, and cocoa prices retreating faster
from their historical highs than previously forecast.
• Monetary policy projections: Central banks in major
jurisdictions are projected to take different paths in
their policy rate decisions, reflecting differences in the
extent of inflationary pressures. In the United States,
the federal funds rate is projected to be reduced along
a slightly more front-loaded path than expected in
the April WEO, dropping to 3.50–3.75 percent at
the end of 2025, still reaching its terminal range of
2.75–3.0 percent around the end of 2028. In the
euro area, policy rates are expected to hold steady at
2 percent, which is broadly the same as that projected
in April. In Japan, policy rates are expected to be
lifted, along broadly the same path as that assumed
in April, gradually rising over the medium term
toward a neutral setting of about 1.5 percent, consistent with keeping inflation and inflation expectations
anchored at the Bank of Japan’s 2 percent target.
• Fiscal policy projections: Advanced economies as a
group are expected to maintain a broadly neutral
fiscal policy stance, which marks a significant departure from the tighter fiscal policy stance assumed
in the April 2025 WEO. In the United States, the
general government fiscal-balance-to-GDP ratio is
expected to deteriorate by 0.5 percentage point in
2026, largely reflecting the passage of the One Big
Beautiful Bill Act (OBBBA) and despite an offset of
about 0.7 percentage point of GDP from projected
tariff revenues. The fiscal balance is projected to
worsen in the euro area—including a 0.8 percentage point widening of the deficit in Germany
resulting from increased spending on infrastructure
and military capability. Under current policies, US
public debt fails to stabilize, rising from 122 percent
of GDP in 2024 to 143 percent of GDP in 2030,
15 percentage points higher than projected in April.
In the euro area, the debt-to-GDP ratio is expected
to reach 92 percent in 2030, up from 87 percent in
2024. By contrast, governments in emerging market
and developing economies, on average, are projected
to modestly tighten fiscal policy in 2026 by about
0.2 percentage point of GDP, reversing the widening
expected in 2025. In China, the deficit is expected
to narrow slightly through 2030, following a widening of 1.2 percentage points in 2025. Public debt
in emerging market and developing economies continues to rise, reaching 82 percent of GDP in 2030,
compared with just under 70 percent in 2024.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

• Trade policy assumptions: Tariffs that have been
announced and implemented as of the beginning of
September are included in the baseline. These measures are assumed to remain in effect indefinitely,
even when they are explicitly stated to have an expiration date, meaning that pauses on higher tariffs
are assumed to remain in place past their expiration
dates and higher rates are assumed not to take effect.
Trade policy uncertainty is assumed to remain elevated through 2025 and 2026, including on account
of the additional pause of higher tariffs between
China and the United States through November and
because legal proceedings are currently underway
in the United States concerning use of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act as a legal
basis for the imposition of tariffs.

Growth Forecast
Global growth is projected to decelerate from
3.3 percent in 2024 to 3.2 percent in 2025 and to
3.1 percent in 2026 (Table 1.1). On a fourth-quarterto-fourth-quarter basis, growth is projected to decline
from 3.6 percent in 2024 to 2.6 percent in 2025 and
recover to 3.3 percent in 2026. At market exchange
rates, world output is projected to grow by 2.6 percent
in both 2025 and 2026, slowing down from 2.8 percent in 2024 (Table 1.2).
The growth forecast is little changed from the July
2025 WEO Update, reflecting gradual adaptation to
trade tensions, but is decisively below the prepandemic average of 3.7 percent. Looking at sequential
growth from the second half of 2025 into 2026 gives
a clearer picture by removing the distortion from
front-loading in the first half of 2025: The global
economy is projected to grow at an annualized average
rate of 3.0 percent over these six quarters, a slowdown
of 0.6 percentage point from the 3.6 percent average
rate in 2024. The forecast for 2025–26 is also lower,
by a cumulative 0.2 percentage point, than projected
in the October 2024 WEO, before the major shifts in
policy stances in key jurisdictions. Given the fluidity
of trade policy assumptions during 2025, comparisons of current forecasts with those in the April 2025
WEO or in the July 2025 WEO Update may obscure
the direction the world economy has traveled. Hence,
the forecasts are discussed in comparison with those
in the October 2024 WEO, which provides a clearer
picture.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

11

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Projections

Difference from July
2025 WEO Update1

Difference from April
2025 WEO1

2024

2025

2026

2025

2026

2025

3.3

3.2

3.1

0.2

0.0

0.4

0.1

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2

1.8
2.8
0.9
–0.5
1.1
0.7
3.5
0.1
1.1
1.6
2.3

1.6
2.0
1.2
0.2
0.7
0.5
2.9
1.1
1.3
1.2
1.8

1.6
2.1
1.1
0.9
0.9
0.8
2.0
0.6
1.3
1.5
2.0

0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.4
0.4
0.1
–0.4
0.2

0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.1
–0.1
–0.4
–0.1

0.2
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.4
0.5
0.2
–0.2
0.0

0.1
0.4
–0.1
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
–0.1
–0.1
0.0

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria4
South Africa

4.3
5.3
5.0
6.5
3.5
4.3
2.4
3.4
1.4
2.6
2.0
4.1
4.1
0.5

4.2
5.2
4.8
6.6
1.8
0.6
2.4
2.4
1.0
3.5
4.0
4.1
3.9
1.1

4.0
4.7
4.2
6.2
2.2
1.0
2.3
1.9
1.5
3.8
4.0
4.4
4.2
1.2

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.0
–0.3
0.2
0.1
0.8
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.5
0.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.2
0.1
0.3
0.1
0.1
1.0
–0.1

0.5
0.7
0.8
0.4
–0.3
–0.9
0.4
0.4
1.3
0.5
1.0
0.3
0.9
0.1

0.1
0.1
0.2
–0.1
0.1
0.1
–0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.2
1.5
–0.1

Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
European Union
ASEAN-55
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

2.8
1.1
4.6
2.1
4.3
4.2

2.6
1.4
4.2
3.3
4.1
4.4

2.6
1.4
4.1
3.7
3.9
5.0

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0

0.3
0.2
0.2
0.7
0.4
0.2

0.2
–0.1
0.2
0.3
0.1
–0.2

3.5

3.6

2.3

1.0

0.4

1.9

–0.2

2.1
5.6

3.1
4.3

1.3
4.0

0.7
1.6

0.3
0.0

1.2
2.3

–0.7
0.6

1.8
6.5

2.1
5.9

1.7
3.3

0.9
1.0

0.4
1.0

0.9
4.3

–0.3
0.3

Commodity Prices
Oil6
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import
weights)

–1.8
3.7

–12.9
7.4

–4.5
4.1

1.0
–0.5

1.2
2.1

2.6
3.0

2.3
3.9

World Consumer Prices7
Advanced Economies8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7

5.8
2.6
7.9

4.2
2.5
5.3

3.7
2.2
4.7

0.0
0.0
–0.1

0.1
0.1
0.2

–0.1
0.0
–0.2

0.1
0.0
0.1

World Output

World Trade Volume (goods and services)
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

2026

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Real effective exchange rates are assumed to remain constant at the levels prevailing during August 1, 2025–August 29, 2025. Economies are listed on
the basis of economic size. The aggregated quarterly data are seasonally adjusted. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1 Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2025 WEO Update, and April 2025 WEO forecasts.

2 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

3 For India, data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis, and GDP from 2011 onward is based on GDP at market prices with fiscal year 2011/12 as a
base year.
4 Nigeria’s national accounts data have been revised and rebased, with 2019 as the new base year. The rebasing provides an updated current view of the
economy and the revisions increased the level of GDP by 40.8 percent in 2019.
5 Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
6 Simple average of prices of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil. The average price of oil in US dollars a barrel was $79.17 in 2024;
the assumed price, based on futures markets, is $68.92 in 2025 and $65.84 in 2026.
7 Excludes Venezuela. See the country-specific note for Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
8 The assumed inflation rates for 2025 and 2026, respectively, are as follows: 2.1 percent and 1.9 percent for the euro area, 3.3 percent and 2.1 percent for
Japan, and 2.7 percent and 2.4 percent for the United States.

12

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Table 1.1. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections (continued)
(Percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Q4 over Q49
Projections

Difference from July
2025 WEO Update1

Difference from April
2025 WEO1

2024

2025

2026

2025

2026

2025

3.6

2.6

3.3

–0.1

0.1

0.2

0.3

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2

1.9
2.4
1.3
–0.2
0.6
0.6
3.7
1.3
1.5
2.3
2.1

1.3
1.9
0.7
0.3
0.8
1.0
2.5
0.2
1.4
0.5
1.2

1.8
2.0
1.7
1.0
1.0
0.1
1.8
1.1
1.4
2.3
2.8

–0.1
0.2
0.0
–0.2
0.1
0.3
0.2
0.4
–0.1
–0.6
–1.0

0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.9
0.2
0.3
0.2
–0.2
1.1

0.1
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.5
0.6
–0.3
–0.1
–1.0

0.3
0.3
0.3
0.0
0.0
–0.8
0.1
–0.2
0.5
0.1
1.1

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria4
South Africa

4.9
5.9
5.4
7.4
3.4
4.5
2.4
3.3
0.4
...
4.4
...
4.0
0.5

3.7
4.5
3.7
6.0
1.3
–0.5
2.1
2.4
1.5
...
4.0
...
3.9
1.5

4.4
5.3
5.0
6.2
2.3
0.5
2.6
2.3
1.7
...
4.0
...
4.3
1.0

0.1
0.0
–0.1
–0.4
–0.2
–0.4
0.2
0.0
1.2
...
0.4
...
–0.1
0.1

0.1
0.1
0.3
–0.2
0.3
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.5
...
0.1
...
0.1
0.1

0.4
0.5
0.5
–0.2
–0.5
–0.9
0.5
0.4
1.7
...
1.5
...
0.2
0.7

0.4
0.6
0.8
–0.1
0.3
–0.3
–0.2
0.1
–0.3
...
0.3
...
1.5
–0.6

Memorandum
World Growth Based on Market Exchange Rates
European Union
ASEAN-55
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

3.0
1.6
4.8
...
4.9
...

2.2
1.0
4.9
...
3.7
...

2.8
1.7
4.5
...
4.4
...

0.0
–0.1
0.9
...
0.1
...

0.1
0.0
–0.5
...
0.1
...

0.3
–0.1
1.3
...
0.4
...

0.3
0.0
0.2
...
0.4
...

–10.1
8.3

–8.3
7.1

–2.2
1.2

3.0
0.5

–1.5
1.7

5.8
5.9

–1.5
0.8

4.9
2.4
6.7

3.6
2.4
4.4

3.0
2.0
3.7

0.1
0.0
0.0

0.1
0.0
0.2

0.1
0.0
0.0

0.0
–0.1
0.1

World Output

Commodity Prices (US dollars)
Oil6
Nonfuel (average based on world commodity import
weights)
World Consumer Prices7
Advanced Economies8
Emerging Market and Developing Economies7

2026

9 For world output, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 90 percent of annual world output at purchasing-power-parity weights.
For emerging market and developing economies, the quarterly estimates and projections account for approximately 85 percent of annual emerging market and
developing economies’ output at purchasing-power-parity weights.

Growth Forecast for Advanced Economies
For advanced economies, growth is projected to be
1.6 percent in 2025 and 2026, both 0.2 percentage
point lower than recorded in 2024 and projected in
the October 2024 WEO.
• In the United States, growth is projected to slow
to 2.0 percent in 2025 and remain steady at
2.1 percent in 2026, broadly the same as in July
and an improvement relative to April on account
of lower effective tariff rates, a fiscal boost from
the passage of the OBBBA, and easing financial

conditions. This projection marks a significant
slowdown from 2024 as well as a cumulative
downward revision of 0.1 percentage point relative
to the October 2024 WEO and 0.7 percentage
point relative to the January 2025 WEO Update.
The downward revision is mainly a result of greater
policy uncertainty, higher trade barriers, and lower
growth in both the labor force and employment.
• Growth in the euro area is expected to pick up modestly to 1.2 percent in 2025 and to 1.1 percent in
2026. While an improvement relative to April and

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

13

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table 1.2. Overview of the World Economic Outlook Projections at Market Exchange Rate Weights
(Percent change)

Projections

Difference from July
2025 WEO Update1

Difference from April
2025 WEO1

2024

2025

2026

2025

2026

2025

2.8

2.6

2.6

0.1

0.0

0.3

0.2

Advanced Economies

1.8

1.6

1.7

0.1

0.0

0.2

0.2

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

4.2
5.2
3.4
2.2
2.3
3.9

4.0
5.0
1.9
2.3
3.6
4.0

3.8
4.5
2.3
2.2
4.0
4.2

0.0
0.1
0.0
0.2
0.2
0.2

0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.3
–0.1

0.5
0.7
–0.2
0.4
0.7
0.3

0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.0

Memorandum
European Union
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

1.0
1.9
4.2
4.0

1.3
3.4
4.0
4.5

1.3
3.9
3.8
5.0

0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1

–0.1
0.3
0.1
–0.1

0.3
0.7
0.5
0.3

–0.1
0.4
0.2
–0.3

World Output

2026

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: The aggregate growth rates are calculated as a weighted average, in which a moving average of nominal GDP in US dollars for the preceding three years is
used as the weight. WEO = World Economic Outlook.
1 Difference based on rounded figures for the current, July 2025 WEO Update, and April 2025 WEO forecasts.

July, this is a cumulative downward revision of 0.4
percentage point compared with the October 2024
WEO. Elevated uncertainty on multiple fronts and
higher tariffs are the main drivers. Recovering private consumption from higher real wages and fiscal
easing in Germany in 2026 provide only a partial
offset, whereas strong performance in Ireland lifts
growth in 2025. The euro area economy is expected
to grow at potential in 2026.
• Forecasts for other advanced economies also mark
significant downward revisions compared with those
in the October 2024 WEO, largely a reflection
of the shifting international trade landscape. In
Canada, the growth forecast for 2025 is 1.2 percent,
and for 2026 it is 1.5 percent—cumulatively
1.7 percentage points below the October 2024
projection. In Japan, growth is expected to accelerate
from 0.1 percent in 2024 to 1.1 percent in 2025
and moderate to 0.6 percent in 2026. These dynamics are driven by an expected pickup in real wage
growth supporting private consumption, despite
headwinds from elevated trade policy uncertainty
and softening external demand. This constitutes
a cumulative downward revision of 0.2 percentage point relative to October 2024. In the United
Kingdom, growth in 2025 and 2026 is expected
to be 1.3 percent, revised, on a cumulative basis,
slightly upward relative to April. While this reflects
strong activity in the first half of 2025 and an
improvement in the external environment, including

14

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

through the UK-US trade deal announced in May,
the projected growth in 2025–26 is still lower by a
cumulative 0.4 percentage point compared with the
forecast in October 2024.
Growth Forecast for Emerging Market and
Developing Economies
For emerging market and developing economies,
growth is projected to moderate from 4.3 percent
in 2024 to 4.2 percent in 2025 and 4.0 percent
in 2026. This is virtually unchanged from the July
WEO Update and is a cumulative upward revision of
0.6 percentage point from the April 2025 WEO. That
said, it is lower than the forecast in October 2024 by
a cumulative 0.2 percentage point, with low-income
developing countries experiencing a larger downward
revision than middle-income economies.
• Growth in emerging and developing Asia is expected
to decline from 5.3 percent in 2024 to 5.2 percent
in 2025 and further to 4.7 percent in 2026. For
quite a few countries in the region—particularly in
ASEAN, among the most affected—the evolution of
growth forecasts largely mimicked that of effective
tariff rates. In China, the 2025 GDP growth forecast
was revised downward by 0.6 percentage point in
the April 2025 WEO, with the escalation of trade
tensions between China and the United States, and
then upward by 0.8 percentage point in the July
WEO Update, following the pause on higher rates
in May. Compared with the October 2024 WEO

CHAPTER 1

projection, growth, at 4.8 percent, is expected
to be 0.3 percentage point higher. Growth is
expected to moderate in 2026 to 4.2 percent. A
stronger-than-expected outturn in the past few quarters, reflecting front-loading in international trade
and relatively robust domestic consumption supported by fiscal expansion in 2025, more than offset
the headwinds from higher uncertainty and tariffs.
In India, growth is projected to be 6.6 percent in
2025 and 6.2 percent in 2026. Compared with the
July WEO Update, this is an upward revision for
2025, with carryover from a strong first quarter
more than offsetting the increase in the US effective
tariff rate on imports from India since July, and a
downward revision for 2026. Compared with the
pre-tariff forecast in October 2024, growth is projected to be cumulatively 0.2 percentage point lower.
• In Latin America and the Caribbean, growth is projected to remain stable at 2.4 percent in 2025 and
fall slightly to 2.3 percent in 2026. The forecast for
2025 is revised upward by 0.4 percentage point relative to April on account of lower tariff rates for most
countries in the region and stronger-than-expected
incoming data. The revision is driven largely by
Mexico, which is expected to grow at 1.0 percent in
2025, 1.3 percentage points higher than forecast in
the April 2025 WEO. For Brazil, the projection for
2025 is revised upward, but that for 2026 is revised
downward, in part because of the higher tariff rate
on the country’s exports to the United States. For
the region as a whole, a forecast for this year and
next that is cumulatively 0.5 percentage point lower
than forecast in the October 2024 WEO reflects
trade policy changes and uncertainty.
• Growth in emerging and developing Europe is
projected to decline substantially, from 3.5 percent
in 2024 to 1.8 percent in 2025, and to recover
modestly to 2.2 percent in 2026. This is driven
mainly by a sharp drop in the growth forecast in
Russia, from 4.3 percent in 2024 to 0.6 percent in
2025 and to 1.0 percent in 2026. Growth for 2025
is 0.9 percentage point lower than in the April 2025
WEO forecast. The downward revision is largely a
result of recent data releases that show a concentration of fiscal expenditures in the fourth quarter of
2024, which pushed estimated GDP growth in 2024
from 4.1 percent to 4.3 percent. The payback is
incorporated in the 2025 projection. Growth projections for Türkiye are revised upward for both 2025
and 2026, on account of stronger-than-expected

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

outturns, and provide a partial offset. Still, for the
region as a whole, the growth forecast is lower than
projected in the October 2024 WEO by a cumulative 0.7 percentage point.
• Growth in the Middle East and Central Asia is
projected to accelerate, from 2.6 percent in 2024 to
3.5 percent in 2025 and to 3.8 percent in 2026, as
the effects of disruptions to oil production and shipping dissipate and the impacts of ongoing conflicts
abate. Compared with April, the projection for 2025
is revised upward by 0.5 percentage point. This
largely reflects developments in Gulf Cooperation
Council countries, in particular Saudi Arabia, where
the unwinding of oil production cuts was faster
than expected, and Egypt, where the outturn in the
first half of 2025 was better than expected. Despite
the region’s relatively smaller exposure to the new
US tariff regime, compared with the October 2024
WEO, its growth projection is cumulatively 0.8 percentage points lower for 2025 and 2026, as a result
of the indirect effects of subdued world demand on
commodity prices.
• In sub-Saharan Africa, growth is expected to remain
subdued, unchanged in 2025 from 4.1 percent in
2024, before picking up to 4.4 percent in 2026.
This is an upward revision relative to the April 2025
WEO forecast by a cumulative 0.5 percentage point,
but a downward revision of 0.1 percentage point
compared with the October 2024 WEO. Whereas
growth in Nigeria is revised upward on account of
supportive domestic factors, including higher oil
production, improved investor confidence, a supportive fiscal stance in 2026, and given its limited
exposure to higher US tariffs, many other economies
see significant downward revisions because of the
changing international trade and official aid landscape. Many low-income countries in sub-Saharan
Africa benefited from preferential access to the US
market under the African Growth and Opportunity
Act, which expired in September. Halting this preferential access is expected to have sizable negative
effects, particularly on Lesotho and Madagascar.

Inflation Forecast
Under the baseline, global headline inflation is
projected to decline to 4.2 percent in 2025 and to
3.7 percent in 2026. This path is virtually the same
as depicted in the previous projections, but there is
variation across countries and regions.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

15

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Inflation forecasts are revised upward in quite a
few economies, relative to the October 2024 WEO,
which serves as a pre-policy-shift benchmark. Among
advanced economies, the most notable cases are
the United Kingdom and the United States. In the
United Kingdom, headline inflation, which started
picking up in 2024, is expected to continue rising in
2025 partly because of changes in regulated prices.
This is projected to be temporary, with a loosening
labor market and moderating wage growth eventually helping inflation return to target at the end of
2026. In the United States, inflation is expected to
pick up beginning in the second half of 2025, as the
impact of tariffs is no longer absorbed within supply
chains and instead passed on to consumers. Inflation
then is expected to return to the Federal Reserve’s
2 percent target during 2027. This forecast assumes
only modest second-round effects, implying potential upside risks to US inflation in the baseline amid
downside risks to employment. Among emerging
market and developing economies, inflation forecasts
for Brazil and Mexico are revised upward. For Brazil,
the revision is more pronounced and in part reflects
the stabilization of inflation expectations above target
rates, reflecting credibility challenges associated with
fiscal policy uncertainties last year, although relief
from more recent currency appreciation is expected to
arrive in late 2025 and in 2026. For Mexico, volatile
categories such as food and more-persistent-thanexpected services inflation contribute to the upward
revision.
For several other economies, inflation forecasts
are revised downward, compared with the October
2024 WEO. In much of emerging and developing
Asia, that is the case. This is largely a reflection of
lower-than-expected outturns, with food, energy, and
administrative prices playing a significant role (for
example, in China, India, and Thailand).
Taken together with the GDP growth forecasts, the
picture varies across countries. US growth in 2025,
forecast at 2.0 percent, is lower than the 2.2 percent projected in the October 2024 WEO. Inflation
in 2025, forecast at 2.7 percent, is higher than the
1.9 percent projected in the October 2024 WEO.
Relative to forecasts prior to the policy shifts, the
US economy is expected to slow more sharply in
2025 than was projected a year ago (Figure 1.11).
Meanwhile, inflation is expected to remain largely
unchanged and elevated, compared with the notable
decline projected in October 2024. This combination

16

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 1.11. Changes in GDP Growth and Inflation
(Percentage points)

October 2025 WEO

October 2024 WEO

0.6 1. 2025 Growth Minus 2024 Growth
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

United States

Euro area

Other AEs

China

Other EMDEs

China

Other EMDEs

2 2. 2025 Inflation Minus 2024 Inflation
1
0
−1
−2
−3
−4

United States

Euro area

Other AEs

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies; WEO = World Economic Outlook.

of a sharper growth slowdown and a slower pace in
disinflation in the United States contrasts with the less
sharp growth slowdown and muted inflation in China.
Elsewhere, in most cases, a pickup in growth is no longer expected or is projected to be much weaker, while
inflation is still expected to decline at about the same
pace as before. This is broadly in line with what would
be anticipated from the introduction of higher US
tariffs, with small deviations in the inflation outlook
attributable to idiosyncratic offsetting factors.

World Trade Outlook and Global Imbalances
World trade is expected to decline modestly over
the five-year forecast horizon (Figure 1.12). Compared
with the April 2025 WEO, world trade volume is
expected to grow faster in 2025 but more slowly in
2026. This reflects the front-loading patterns observed.
Trade volume growth at an average rate of 2.9 percent
in 2025–26, even with the temporary boost from

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.13. Current Account and International Investment
Positions

Figure 1.12. World Trade
(Percent of GDP)
World

US

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

EU

Japan

China

(Percent of global GDP)

India

50

European creditors
European debtors
Japan
Oil exporters

40

3 1. Global Current Account Balance

6

30

2

4

20

1

2

10

0

0

−1

−2

−2

−4

60 1. Exports of Goods and Services

0
2000

05

10

15

20

25

30

60 2. Imports of Goods and Services

United States
China
Others
Overall balance (right scale)

50

−3
2005 07

40

20 2. Global International Investment Position

30

10

20

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

25

27

29 30

−6

0

10
0
2000

09

−10
05

10

15

20

25

30

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Shaded area represents forecasts. European Union (EU) data include both
intra- and extra-EU trades.

front-loading in 2025, is lower than projected in the
October 2024 WEO, which envisioned an average
growth rate of 3.3 percent.
Global current account imbalances in 2025 are
expected to exceed those in the October 2024 WEO
and to narrow thereafter (Figure 1.13). Among the
three largest contributors to the overall balance (China,
Germany, United States), preemptive trade ahead
of prospective tariffs widens the US deficit and the
surplus for China, before unwinding as pull-forward
behavior dissipates (Figure 1.14).
The narrowing of global imbalances works through
three main channels. The first is trade policy shifts.
In the United States, the rise in import costs and
greater uncertainty dampen investment, softening
import demand. At the same time, tariffs on intermediate inputs act as a tax on US manufacturers, raising
production costs for exports of final products and
US products that compete against imports—leaving
the net effects on the current account ambiguous.

−20
−30
2005 07

09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

25

27

29 30

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: “European creditors” are Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy,
Luxembourg, The Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, and Switzerland. “European
debtors” are Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain. “Oil exporters” are Algeria,
Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Nigeria, Oman, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia,
United Arab Emirates, and Venezuela.

Further, even as higher tariff receipts are likely to lift
public savings, decreasing private savings are likely to
offset this increase. Overall, the impact on the current
account of this channel is likely to be limited, consistent with both model-based and empirical analysis
(2025 External Sector Report).
Second, exchange rate movements are an additional
channel of external adjustment. Higher unilateral
tariffs would normally be associated with a stronger
currency for the tariffing country, helping with the
absorption of the tariff shock. The recent depreciation
of the US dollar, instead, enhances export price competitiveness and restrains import-intensive consumption—possibly helping to narrow US external deficits.
A weaker dollar also tends to ease global financial

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

17

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

(Percentage points)
1.2

October 2025 WEO

October 2024 WEO

0.9
0.6
0.3
0

Figure 1.15. Medium-Term Growth Outlook
2030 growth projections (Oct. 2025 WEO)

Figure 1.14. Projected Change in Current Account Balance

10 1. Projected GDP Growth Deceleration
(Percent, five-year-ahead GDP growth)
8

AEs
EMMIEs
LIDCs

6
4
2
0

0

2

−0.3
−0.6

2025 26 27 28 29 2025 26 27 28 29 2025 26 27 28 29
United States
China
Germany

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Each data point shows difference from previous year of current account balance
in percent of GDP series in respective WEOs. WEO = World Economic Outlook.

Medium-Term Outlook
A more fragmented international economic landscape adds to the challenges many countries are facing
in lifting medium-term growth prospects, including
from aging populations and subdued productivity
growth. In the absence of durable structural reforms,
growth forecasts over the five-year WEO horizon
remain mediocre. World output is projected to expand
at an average annual pace of 3.2 percent in 2027–30,
a persistently lackluster performance compared with
the prepandemic (2000–19) historical average of
3.7 percent.
18

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

10

0.6 2. Medium-Term Growth Revisions
(Percentage points)
0.3
0
−0.3
−0.6
−0.9
−1.2

conditions, providing some near-term global demand,
but this is likely to be eroded by higher inflation in
the United States relative to the rest of the world and
the associated adjustment in the real effective exchange
rate.
Last but not least, fiscal changes have accompanied
trade developments. China and Germany have recently
announced and expanded spending measures to boost
domestic demand, which will lower net savings and
reduce external surpluses. In the United States, the
OBBBA is expected to widen the fiscal deficit over the
medium term relative to projections in previous WEO
reports, despite back-loaded spending cuts and sizable
tariff receipts. This weighs on public saving and so
tends to widen the current account deficit—or at least
temper any narrowing from other channels.

4
6
8
2024 growth projections (Oct. 2019 WEO)

−1.5

Interquartile range
GDP-weighted average
Simple average
AEs

EMMIEs

LIDCs

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, bubble sizes are based on 2030 GDP at purchasing power parity in
October 2025 WEO. In panel 2, the medium-term growth revisions are defined as 2030
real GDP growth from October 2025 WEO minus 2024 growth from October 2019
WEO. AEs = advanced economies; EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income
economies; LIDCs = low-income developing countries; WEO = World Economic
Outlook.

Relative to October 2019, prior to the sequence
of shocks that hit the world economy (the pandemic,
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the inflation surge, and
now the protectionist trade policies), the medium-term
outlook today is decidedly weaker. Medium-term
growth prospects are dimming for about two-thirds of
the world economy (measured by purchasing power
parity), and the decline is more pronounced for emerging market and middle-income economies (Figure 1.15,
panel 1).
Despite the heterogeneity in medium-term growth
revisions (Figure 1.15, panel 2), particularly within
the group of low-income developing countries, the
stronger downward revisions for emerging market and
developing economies portend challenges to the pace
of global income convergence (see also the October
2023 WEO and the April 2024 WEO). The world’s
poorest economies, including those suffering from
prolonged conflict, are particularly at risk of seeing
their growth momentum decelerate and their per
capita income gap relative to advanced economies

CHAPTER 1

Figure 1.16. Official Development Assistance, Revenues, and
Interest Burden
(Percent)

Figure 1.17. Migrant Stock and Remittances
(Percent)
15

Immigration

70 1. ODA in Percent of GNI in 2023
60

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Emigration

Remittances

12

50
9

40
30

6

20
10

3
SYR
CAF
SSD
SOM
YEM
BDI
AFG
MOZ
GMB
LBR
MWI
RWA
GNB
TCD
MDG
NER
BFA
SLE
MLI
TGO
COD
UGA
ETH
SDN

0

20 2. ODA, Debt Service, and Revenue of LIDCs

Net ODA
Debt service
Revenue

5
0
2000

04

08

12

16

AEs

EMMIEs

LIDCs

Dev.
Asia

Em.
Europe

LAC

ME&CA

SSA

Sources: United Nations, International Migrant Stock 2024; World Bank, World
Development Indicators 2025; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Immigrants are expressed as a percentage of the destination population,
emigrants of the origin population, and remittances as a percentage of GDP in US
dollars. AEs = advanced economies; Dev. Asia = developing Asia; Em. Europe =
emerging Europe; EMMIEs = emerging market and middle-income economies;
LAC = Latin America and the Caribbean; LIDCs = low-income developing countries;
ME&CA = Middle East and Central Asia; SSA = sub-Saharan Africa.

15
10

0

20

23

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; World Bank, World
Development Indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, data labels in the figure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes. In panel 2, net ODA and debt service are weighted
by and shown as percentages of GNI, and revenue is weighted by and shown as
percentage of GDP. Revenue excludes grants. GNI = gross national income; LIDCs =
low-income developing countries; ODA = official development assistance.

widen. This comes amid a significant decline in
financing flows to these economies, including as
a result of cuts in grants and concessional lending
(Chabert and Powell 2025) and significantly higher
reliance on commercial creditors for external financing
(IMF 2025a; October 2025 Global Financial Stability
Report). Official development assistance constitutes a
significant share of gross national income in some of
the most vulnerable countries in the Middle East and
in Africa (Figure 1.16, panel 1). It affects sectors from
health and education to energy. Based on tracking of
donor announcements, countries such as Afghanistan,
the Central African Republic, and Somalia may be
hit hardest by aid cuts in proportion to their gross
national income (Huckstep and others 2025). The
direct short-term macroeconomic impact of aid cuts
may not be large and will ultimately depend on
details of the cuts and the response of governments in
recipient countries. The options for governments to

make up for loss of aid may be limited as debt service
burdens climb and government revenues stagnate
(Figure 1.16, panel 2). The effects will become visible
over time as likely deterioration in energy access and
human capital accumulation reduce potential output,
on top of the humanitarian costs involved. Declining
official development assistance could also heighten
geopolitical instability, migration pressures, and security risks in fragile regions, and recipient countries may
increasingly rely on a patchwork of smaller, less coordinated, and potentially less accountable donors.
Immigration is another aspect of recent policy
shifts that has implications for medium-term growth
in both low-income countries and advanced economies. The global stock of international migrants is
estimated at 285 million as of 2022, with 168 million
participating in the labor force (ILO 2025). About a
quarter of those international migrants in the labor
force are in North America—primarily the United
States—and another quarter are in western Europe.
On average, roughly 15 percent of advanced economies’ populations are immigrants, while emigrants
constitute a significant portion of populations in
emerging Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean,
and the Middle East and North Africa (Figure 1.17).
Crucially, remittances—which alleviate poverty and
under some circumstances modestly but permanently
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

19

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

raise GDP (Francois and others 2022)—are a significant resource for many of these source countries. That
said, output costs of more restrictive policies on the
cross-border flow of labor may also be sizable in the
destination countries. In the United States, the new
immigration policies could reduce the country’s GDP
by 0.3 percent to 0.7 percent a year (Edelberg, Veuger,
and Watson 2025; Mayda and Peri 2025). A decline
in labor supply, especially of immigrant labor, which
tends to be associated with business dynamism and
innovation, would also lower potential output. When
compounded with the negative supply shock imposed
by tariff measures, this implies that labor market slack
may not increase much and that the disinflationary
momentum the US economy has recently experienced
may vanish sooner rather than later. Certain sectors of
the economy where immigrants form a large portion
of the labor force, such as construction, hospitality,
personal services, and farm work, could experience
stronger inflationary pressures than others. Then,
further decreases in the monetary policy rate would
need to proceed cautiously, depending critically on
incoming data.

Risks to the Outlook: Still Tilted to the
Downside
Risks to the outlook remain tilted to the downside,
as in the July 2025 WEO Update.

Downside Risks
Prolonged trade policy uncertainty and ratcheting up
of protectionist trade measures. Further increases in trade
policy uncertainty would weigh on firms’ investment
decisions and worsen the growth outlook. It would
also hamper their ability to optimize inventories,
potentially leading to short-term output volatility—the
front-loading of imports followed by payback periods.
Further increases in tariffs could weigh negatively on
activity in countries directly impacted by the trade
measures. While other countries may benefit from
tariff-induced trade diversion, especially if their exports
embed a rising share of domestic value added, the
aggregate impact is likely to depress global output
over the medium term given the disruption to supply
chains (April 2025 WEO). The rise in protectionist
measures both through tariffs and nontariff measures
(including export controls on new technologies) could
lead to further disruption and fragmentation of supply

20

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

chains, reversing some of the efficiency gains of the
past few decades from trade liberalization. Reliance
on ad hoc bilateral deals for trade negotiations, which
erode previous agreements and whose details and longevity remain unclear, would not meaningfully reduce
trade policy uncertainty. If such deals are coupled with
further discriminatory measures against third countries,
they may generate additional negative spillovers and
tit-for-tat dynamics. Over the medium term, more
protectionist stances and fragmentation could also
stunt global technological diffusion, further hurting
growth prospects, especially of emerging market and
developing economies. This could in turn give rise to
domestic polarization and social unrest.
Shocks to labor supply. Further deterioration in labor
supply from more stringent immigration policies in
advanced economies could weigh on firms’ investment
and hiring decisions, especially in economies where
certain skills are in short supply and that have recently
relied on immigration flows to ease labor market tightness. This would act as a negative supply-side shock
with direct bearing on the economy’s potential output
capacity. Emerging pockets of labor market tightness—
as experienced in the aftermath of the COVID-19
pandemic shock—could put upward pressure on the
price of services and increase core inflation.
Fiscal vulnerabilities, financial market fragilities,
and their interactions. In light of the recent surge in
long-term sovereign bond yields in major advanced
economies, abrupt market reactions to fiscal vulnerabilities could have an amplified impact. Rising fiscal
worries may lead borrowing costs to increase further
or, equivalently, could erode the “convenience yield”
on the sovereign debt of some large advanced economies, given the sensitivity of government bond yields
to changes in debt (Furceri, Goncalves, and Li 2025).
In countries where a high share of the outstanding
debt stock is rolled over annually, the rise in yields
would increase debt-service costs and may reduce other
critical spending, such as capital spending or support for shock-prone households. In addition, many
low-income countries are reeling from the impact of
reduced official aid flows, which increase their reliance
on private creditors to meet their gross financing needs
and add to their fiscal vulnerability. A repricing of core
government bond yields could be amplified by maturity mismatches and leverage among nonbank financial
institutions and could ripple through to other assets,
triggering disorderly price corrections where asset
valuations are above fundamentals. To the extent that

CHAPTER 1

market repricing worsens balance sheets for households
and firms, it could weigh down consumption and
investment. The rapid rise of stablecoins, as alternatives to traditional safe assets and bank deposits, may
encourage currency substitution. And, in the event of a
run on a given stablecoin, it may jeopardize the market
for the assets that back it—such as short-term government bonds or demand deposits—and pose systemic
risks to the financial system (Chapter 1 of the October
2025 Global Financial Stability Report).
Repricing of new technologies. Excessively optimistic
growth expectations about AI could be revised in light
of incoming data from early adopters and could trigger
a market correction. Elevated valuations in tech and
AI-linked sectors have been fueled by expectations of
transformative productivity gains. If these gains fail
to materialize, the resulting earnings disappointment
could lead to a reassessment of the sustainability of
AI-driven valuations and a drop in tech stock prices,
with systemic implications. A potential bust of the
AI boom could rival the dot-com crash of 2000–01
in severity, especially considering the dominance of
a few tech firms in market indices and involvement
of less-regulated private credit loans funding much
of the industry’s expansion. Such a correction could
erode household wealth and dampen consumption.
To the extent that the AI hype has led to excessive
capital flows into a narrow set of firms and sectors, any
unwinding of these positions could then entail a slow
economic recovery hampered by capital misallocation.
These vulnerabilities are compounded by constrained
fiscal space, which may limit the effectiveness of policy
responses.
Eroding good governance and institutional independence. Intensification of political pressure on policy
institutions safeguarded by a country’s constitution,
statutes, and case law—for example, central banks,
whose primacy of independence is upheld by both
conventional wisdom and empirical evidence—could
erode hard-won public confidence in their ability
to fulfill their mandates. This could de-anchor the
public’s inflation expectations. The evidence shows
that political pressure on central banks tends to
increase the intensity and persistence of inflationary
pressures (Binder 2021; Drechsel 2025). Pressures
on technocratic institutions mandated with data
collection and dissemination could also erode the
public’s and markets’ trust in statistics from official
sources, significantly complicating the tasks of central
banks and policymakers in making policy decisions,

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

while diminishing transparency and hampering
price discovery in financial markets. It also raises the
likelihood of policy mistakes if political interference
leads to compromise in data quality, reliability, and
timeliness.
Renewed spikes in commodity prices arise as a result
of climate shocks, regional conflicts, or broader geopolitical tensions. Escalation in regional conflicts
could result in sustained increases in the prices of
food, fuel, and other essential commodities, with
commodity-importing nations particularly susceptible
to heightened inflationary pressures amid constrained
fiscal space. Moreover, extreme heat, prolonged
drought, and other natural disasters—exacerbated
by climate change—may adversely affect agricultural
yields, sparking food supply shocks and amplifying
food security challenges. These developments would
disproportionately impact low-income countries, where
households allocate a substantial share of their expenditures to essential commodities.

Upside Risks
Breakthrough in trade negotiations, leading to lower
tariffs and improved policy predictability. The potentially
heavy costs associated with global trade fragmentation
and dislocation of supply chains may spur breakthroughs in trade negotiations that reduce aggregate
tariff rates as part of expanded agreements for regional
or multilateral cooperation. In addition, restoring
rules-based nondiscriminatory frameworks could
measurably improve trade policy predictability and
facilitate broad-based efficiency gains (see Box 1.2 for a
discussion of the potential output gains from a return
to a world of lower tariffs and reduced trade policy
uncertainty). Strengthening cooperation in areas such
as trade in services, streamlining business regulation,
and fostering capital market integration could help
unlock investment and boost productivity growth.
A faster pace of structural reforms. In an increasingly
challenging global environment, both advanced and
emerging market and developing economies could
enhance domestic structural reform initiatives to
prevent further declines in productivity and growth
potential relative to their peers. Accelerating the pace
of macrocritical structural reforms—such as those
aimed at increasing labor force participation, reducing
resource misallocation in labor and capital markets, or
promoting business innovation—could contribute to
stronger medium-term growth.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

21

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Artificial intelligence reigniting productivity growth.
Faster AI adoption could help unleash strong productivity gains as firms increase uptake of the various
AI-based tools being developed and deployed at high
speed. This may be accompanied by increased business dynamism if the right policies are in place to
enable high-productivity firms to continue to grow—
and allow unproductive ones to exit the market—
prompting an efficiency allocation of resources that
supports aggregate productivity growth. Gains from
AI could well exceed potential costs from their adverse
effects on employment, especially if governments put
in place adequate regulatory frameworks and offer
supportive labor market programs aimed at upskilling
and re-skilling workers at risk of displacement.

Policies: Bringing Confidence,
Predictability, and Sustainability
Anchoring Trade in Predictable Rules
Removing trade policy uncertainty. Countries should
set out and respect clear and transparent trade policy
road maps to reduce volatility, stabilize expectations,
and support investment. In periods of heightened
uncertainty, pragmatic cooperation and predictable
processes help limit costly precautionary adjustments
and anchor confidence in a rules-based system.
Modernizing trade rules and cooperating to lower
barriers. Policymakers should update trade rules to
reflect the evolving structure of commerce—services,
digital trade and data flows, complex subsidies, and
supply-chain security—thereby improving predictability and the conditions in which firms can compete
fairly. Practical avenues include interoperable standards for data and services and trade and investment
facilitation platforms. However, modernizing without
overreach is essential: Trade rules should be targeted to
clearly identified cross-border spillovers and calibrated
to respect legitimate prudential objectives. Cooperation across regional and multilateral platforms can
keep trade regimes interoperable. Effective, trusted
dispute-settlement mechanisms can increase credibility
and, hence, uptake of new rules.
Countries should pursue bilateral, regional, and plurilateral negotiations to lower barriers—tariffs, quotas,
and behind-the-border frictions—aiming for agreements that remain open to those willing to accept similar obligations while avoiding raising barriers against
third parties. Design options include open-accession
22

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

clauses to promote inclusivity and minimize fragmentation and disciplinary measures that curb discriminatory
procurement. Negotiations should aim to de-escalate
tensions and prevent tariff hikes, with an emphasis
on nondiscriminatory market opening. The objective
should be to lower, not raise, trade and investment
barriers and to limit discriminatory elements that risk
negative third-country spillovers and renewed tensions.
Managed trade provisions—such as purchase commitments and quantitative restrictions—should be avoided
because they lead to distortions and diversion and
are unlikely to address external imbalances, which are
driven by aggregate saving–investment dynamics.
Pairing trade diplomacy with macroeconomic adjustment. To lock in these gains, trade diplomacy should
be aligned with domestic policies that address the
root causes of large external imbalances (Chapter 1
of the 2025 External Sector Report). For Europe, this
could include higher public infrastructure investment
to raise potential growth and close the postpandemic
productivity gap with the United States. For China,
rebalancing toward household consumption—
including through fiscal measures with a greater focus
on social spending and the property sector—and
scaling back industrial policies would reduce external
surpluses and alleviate domestic deflationary pressures.
For the United States, credible fiscal consolidation
would ease demand pressures and lower global interest
rate spillovers. Aligning trade diplomacy with macroeconomic measures can defuse persistent sources of
friction.

Rebuilding Fiscal Buffers and Safeguarding Debt
Sustainability
Restoring buffers. Fiscal policy space has significantly
declined during the unprecedented series of shocks the
global economy has endured in recent years. Additional spending demands are coming from population
aging and the need to ensure national and economic
security. More than ever, countries should implement
credible medium-term fiscal consolidation—designed
to rebuild buffers while protecting spending to support
the vulnerable. With debt ratios already elevated and
projected to rise further over coming decades under
current policies, heavy debt burdens will likely weigh
on growth, crowd out priority spending, and heighten
rollover and interest rate risks. Separately, fiscal strategies that rest on benign baselines or assume extraordinary growth are themselves a source of fragility

CHAPTER 1

and should not anchor plans. Durable adjustment
requires a balanced package drawn from a realistic set
of available options—spending rationalization and
revenue mobilization—rather than reliance on financial
repression, monetary financing, or financial market
complacency, given that these involve material macrofinancial risks.
Fiscal consolidation should prioritize measures
that raise efficiency and crowd in private investment
(October 2025 Fiscal Monitor). This entails broadening
tax bases and strengthening revenue administration
and reprioritizing expenditure toward high-multiplier
uses—such as infrastructure, skills development, and
well-targeted social protection. Automatic stabilizers
should be allowed to operate fully over the cycle to
support macroeconomic smoothing. Robust frameworks and credible rules, well-resourced independent
fiscal institutions, improved fiscal governance, and
greater debt transparency are critical to fiscal adjustment efforts (Acalin and others, forthcoming).
Where new discretionary support is warranted—for
example, for households or firms severely affected by
trade disruptions—it should be tightly targeted, transparently costed, and explicitly temporary. Programs
should include clear sunset clauses with a preset expiration date and a preannounced step-down path. To
safeguard adjustment, these offsetting measures should
be specified before they are introduced, with explicit
identification of savings from expenditure reprioritization or additional revenue, particularly where fiscal
space is constrained.
Where debt is unsustainable, restructuring may be
required, in addition to fiscal consolidation. Continued progress in operationalizing international sovereign
debt resolution mechanisms—including the Group
of Twenty (G20) Common Framework—and greater
convergence of practices through the Global Sovereign
Debt Roundtable can make necessary restructuring
more timely, predictable, and less costly.
Ensuring debt sustainability. Credibility is central
to placing public debt on a clear downward path.
Governments should publish medium-term fiscal
frameworks with clear anchors, preannounced adjustment paths, and contingency plans to manage shocks
(IMF 2025b). Communication should include explicit
guardrails against monetary financing to avoid the
inflationary risks of fiscal dominance. Together, these
elements reinforce market confidence, lower risk
premiums, and help ensure that consolidation gains
translate into durable debt sustainability.

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Monetary Policy Priorities: Tailored, Transparent,
Independent
Calibrating monetary policy to country circumstances.
Central banks should calibrate monetary policy to preserve price stability, with due consideration for where
activity stands relative to potential output. In economies imposing or retaliating with tariffs, these measures operate as supply shocks—pushing up inflation,
at least temporarily, while weighing on activity. Interest
rate cuts should be contingent on clear evidence that
inflation is durably low and stable. Tariffs targeted
at particular industries also warrant close scrutiny, as
they are analogous to sector-specific supply shocks for
the imposing countries, steepen the Phillips curve,
and alter the inflation-output trade-off (Chapter 2 of
the October 2024 WEO). By contrast, in economies
that have not imposed tariffs, the dominant impulse
may be weaker demand; however, any reduction in
policy rates should be considered cautiously and is not
presumed. Resilient domestic demand can keep inflationary pressures elevated. Only where disinflation is
firmly established and slack has clearly widened would
a gradual easing of the policy rate be appropriate.
Clear central bank communication. In high-­
uncertainty environments, transparency boosts
predictability for market participants. Central banks
should articulate the reaction function (for example,
data dependencies, balance of risks) and publish a
small number of scenarios for inflation and economic
activity, with concise explanations of the transmission
mechanism. Messages should be tailored to distinct audiences, and information should be released
promptly and with equal accessibility for all intended
recipients. A predictable calendar and a consistent format across statements, minutes, and projections further
facilitate learning about the reaction function over time
(Bernanke 2024).
Independence and credibility as pillars of stability.
Safeguarding central bank independence is essential
for macrofinancial stability. Once credibility erodes,
re-anchoring expectations usually requires a prolonged
period of tight monetary policy and elevated interest
rates—which is costlier than preventing credibility
loss in the first place (Pastén and Reis 2021). These
risks are amplified where fiscal dominance pressures emerge—when elevated public financing needs
encroach on monetary decisions. Seeking to influence
the central bank to keep policy rates low or tolerating
surprise inflation may appear to ease the near-term
fiscal arithmetic, but it is eventually self-defeating.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

23

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Term and risk premiums widen and medium- to longterm nominal yields rise because of higher expected
inflation (and ultimately higher actual inflation),
which offsets any initial interest savings and, in some
cases, unsettles demand for sovereign debt (Leeper
2023). Consistent with this observation, Box 2.3 in
Chapter 2 documents 134 politically motivated central
bank governor exits since 2000 and finds that such
interference loosens policy, weakens currencies, and
lifts inflation and inflation expectations, with some
medium-term activity gains coming at the expense of
significant deviations from price stability.
More broadly, macroeconomic performance rests
on the quality and independence of institutions across
the policy ecosystem—fiscal frameworks, financial
supervision, competition and insolvency regimes, the
judiciary, and, critically, national statistical systems.
High-quality, timely, and professionally independent
data are a public good: They reduce uncertainty and
improve private sector planning and policy design.
By contrast, weak data governance—gaps in coverage,
opaque methodologies, infrequent publication, or
politically influenced revisions—undermines accountability and blunts the effectiveness of policy.
Best practices combine legal and operational
safeguards for central banks with strong supporting institutions. Key elements underpinned by the
constitution, statutes, and case law include budgetary
autonomy, the ability to set monetary policy free of
interference, and the prohibition of short- and longterm direct lending to government.
Tackling excessive exchange rate volatility. The
asymmetric effects of tariffs on the imposing and the
targeted economies can push monetary policy tradeoffs apart, even when business cycles are initially synchronized. In most cases, exchange rates should move
flexibly in line with market conditions to facilitate
macroeconomic adjustment. If exchange rate movements become disorderly, the IMF’s Integrated Policy
Framework provides country-specific guidance; where
appropriate—and alongside sound monetary and fiscal
stances—temporary foreign exchange intervention or
targeted capital flow measures may be warranted.
Preserving macrofinancial stability. Financial policies should prioritize containing liquidity risks in
nonbank finance and preserving resilience in the core
banking system. In line with Financial Stability Board
guidance, private credit funds should limit stock
creation and redemption frequency. Regulators should

24

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

mandate liquidity tools and regular stress tests to
ensure resilience in downturns. In the banking sector,
fully implementing internationally agreed capital and
liquidity standards and strengthening the financial
sector safety net will help safeguard intermediation
amid elevated uncertainty. A comprehensive, risk-based
regulatory and supervisory framework for crypto assets
will mitigate macrofinancial stability risks, including
robust regulatory frameworks to accommodate the
rapid rise in stablecoins (see Chapter 1 of the October
2025 Global Financial Stability Report).

Policies for Severe Shock Mitigation
Amid elevated uncertainty, the wider use of scenario
analysis can strengthen policy readiness and credibility.
Authorities should develop a baseline and a small set
of severe but plausible alternatives that jointly span
macroeconomic and financial risks. Each scenario
should be accompanied by an outline of plausible
policy responses that would help frame private sector
expectations. This could include, for monetary policy,
alternative rate paths and, where relevant, balance
sheet options and communication templates; for fiscal
policy, calibrated use of automatic stabilizers and
time-bound, targeted support; for financial stability,
liquidity backstops and activation thresholds for available macroprudential buffers; and, where warranted by
country circumstances, capital flow measures consistent
with the IMF’s Integrated Policy Framework.

Policies with Medium-Term Impact
Given the mounting challenges, there is an urgent
need to identify and implement measures that can
sustainably lift medium-term growth prospects. Some
countries are turning to industrial policies, but these
come with opportunity costs and trade-offs—most
notably, a large fiscal cost—at a time public finances
are already stretched (see Chapter 3). Known as “vertical” policies, these target public support to particular
firms and sectors and should be used with care, with
keen awareness of their opportunity costs and tradeoffs, balancing goals to expand production in certain
sectors against fiscal costs, higher consumer prices, and
resource misallocation. Consideration should be more
prominently given to “horizontal” reforms that aim to
improve the general business environment and apply
uniformly across the economy.

CHAPTER 1

Disciplined use of industrial policy. To maximize the
effectiveness of industrial policy and limit its costs,
governments must diagnose market failures clearly,
identifying specific areas where intervention can yield
the largest benefits. All policies should be embedded in
a robust institutional and macroeconomic framework,
ensuring coordination among agencies and maintaining fiscal discipline, especially where debt is high and
fiscal space limited. Governments should set explicit,
measurable goals for industrial interventions, such as
job creation, technological advancement, or increased
domestic production, and should design policies to
focus on areas with the highest potential for positive
innovation spillovers and transformative impact (see
also Chapter 2 of the April 2024 Fiscal Monitor).
Strong governance is the key to successful implementation, with transparent selection processes, independent
oversight, and accountability mechanisms reducing
the risk of wasteful spending and corruption. Policies
must include mechanisms for regular evaluation and
recalibration. Governments should be prepared to scale
back or discontinue ineffective measures. Policymakers
should also carefully weigh the costs against potential
benefits and be mindful of possible negative spillovers
to other sectors or countries.
In the cross-border context, industrial policies
should not be deployed to expand exports to compensate for lost markets, as such responses are costly
and risk exacerbating trade distortions. If support to
affected firms is considered, it should be cautious,
narrowly targeted, and time-bound, aimed at specific,
well-diagnosed market failures—that is, cases with
clearly identified externalities, known magnitude, and
well-established key demand and supply elasticities.
Where countries face strong pressures to protect the
local economy—for example, trade diversion or surges
in foreign direct investment—they should prioritize
instruments found in international agreements and
designed for that purpose, rather than resorting to ad
hoc industrial policy.
Implementing structural reforms. With challenges on
multiple fronts and persistently dim medium-term
prospects, growth-enhancing reforms have more
urgency than ever.
Population aging, rapid technological change, and
shifting patterns of comparative advantage in skills are
reshaping labor markets across advanced and emerging
market economies. Comprehensive policy packages
that raise labor utilization and potential growth are

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

therefore central to easing macroeconomic trade-offs
and safeguarding fiscal sustainability.
Labor market institutions should facilitate mobility
and efficient matching. Modernized public employment
services, digital job-matching platforms, and relocation assistance can speed reallocation from declining
to expanding sectors. Portable benefits across jobs and
contract types, along with affordable childcare and
parental leave, can raise participation—especially among
women—and smooth earnings risks during transitions.
Migration policies calibrated to domestic skill shortages
can also clear bottlenecks while protecting domestic
workers (see Chapter 3 of the April 2025 WEO).
Pension and retirement systems should support
longer, healthier working lives through flexibility
and actuarially fair incentives. Gradual retirement—
through partial pensions and phased work schedules—
can keep older workers engaged while easing physical
demands (see Chapter 2 of the April 2025 WEO).
Evidence also suggests that voluntary part-time work
at older ages can raise well-being and that enabling
such options can support both participation and life
satisfaction (Nikolova and Graham 2014).
Advances in digitalization and AI can lift productivity and expand potential growth, especially when
paired with complementary investments in workforce
skills, strong management, interoperable infrastructure,
competitive markets, and sound data governance and
cybersecurity (Gopinath 2023). Realizing these gains
calls for diffusion-oriented policies that both enable
adoption and protect workers: Support for the uptake
of digital tools by small firms, management upgrading,
and data interoperability should complement traditional R&D incentives.
Competition and product market reforms should
foster entry and reduce barriers to reallocating
resources toward high-productivity firms; where trade
shocks are concentrated, time-bound, well-targeted
adjustment assistance—training, relocation support,
and wage insurance—should replace open-ended
protection. Improving the overall business climate—
through infrastructure, education, and regulatory
reform—can also amplify the impact of industrial
policy.
For low-income countries facing challenges from
cuts to international aid, strengthening capacity to
mobilize domestic resources is crucial. This involves
not only rationalization of public spending, increased
transparency, and anti-corruption measures but also

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

25

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

administrative reforms to support provision of basic
services. In parallel, to help vulnerable economies,
donors should explore ways to mobilize more development assistance—meeting and front-loading existing
commitments, with priority on grants and highly
concessional terms.
Addressing climate change efficiently. A well-designed
mix of policies can drive low-carbon, resilient growth.
Investing in technologies such as solar and wind and in
energy-efficient systems can reduce carbon emissions
and create new industries and jobs. Implementing
carbon pricing mechanisms, such as carbon taxes or
cap-and-trade systems, can incentivize businesses to
reduce their carbon footprint. This can be comple-

26

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

mented by fiscal incentives like tax breaks or subsidies
for green technologies. Providing technical assistance
and financial support for adaptation projects, especially in low-income countries, can help them cope
with the impacts of climate change. This assistance
includes funding for infrastructure improvements and
capacity-building initiatives. Transition from fossil fuels
to renewables can enhance energy security by reducing
dependence on imported fuels, create employment
opportunities in the green energy sector, and improve
the balance of payments by reducing energy importation costs. It can also enhance economic stability
by reducing the volatility associated with fossil fuel
markets.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.1. Trade Reallocation in Response to Tariffs: Will This Time Be Different?
The shift in US trade policy in 2025 differs
notably from the changes during 2018–19. For
instance, whereas the previous round of tariff
increases was directed primarily at a single trading
partner—China—the current period is characterized
by broader-based tariff hikes affecting a wider range
of countries, alongside a marked rise in trade policy
uncertainty.1 This raises an important question: Has
the distinct nature of the 2025 tariff shock led to different patterns of adjustment in bilateral trade between
the United States and China, both with each other
and with third-party countries, relative to the aftermath of 2018–19 tariff hikes? This box sheds some
preliminary light on this question based on bilateral
monthly trade flow data.
There is ample evidence of changes in international
trade, foreign direct investment, and global value
chains in response to the tariff increases of 2018–19
and the rise in trade tensions (see, for example,
Fajgelbaum and others 2024; Freund and others 2024;
Gopinath and others 2025; Graziano and others
2024). The bilateral US-China decoupling was accompanied by increased trade and investment ties with
third countries. China’s exports to the United States
fell by about 6 percent within two years (Figure 1.1.1).
This was accompanied by a steady increase in exports
to China’s substitutes (based on the degree of substitutability between that country’s products and
Chinese varieties) and less of an increase in China’s
complements.
Preliminary trade data for 2025 (marked in dashed
lines) reveal early signs of further decoupling between
The authors of this box are Adam Jakubik and Monika
Sztajerowska.
1Tariff episodes also differ in tariff size, product scope, initial
tariff levels, and the speed of implementation, among other ways.

Figure 1.1.1. Exports by Destination Country Type
and Tariff Episode

(Index, Feb. 2018 and Feb. 2025 = 100; solid = Feb. 2018 tariff
episode, dashed = Feb. 2025 tariff episode)
115 1. Exports from China
110
105
100
United States
ROW: substitutes
ROW: complements

95
90
−5

0

5

10

15

20

10

15

20

115 2. Exports from US
110
105
100
95
90
85

China
ROW: substitutes
ROW: complements

80
−5

0

5

Sources: Fajgelbaum and others 2024; Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: X-axis value 0 corresponds to the tariff start dates February
2018 and February 2025, respectively. Each series is normalized to its
respective date 0, at which the value equals 100. Countries are classified
as substitutes or complements to China based on how their exports
respond to tariffs on Chinese goods. Substitutes (complements) are
countries whose exports increase (decrease) when Chinese exports are
taxed, reflecting positive (negative) substitution elasticity with respect
to China. See Fajgelbaum and others (2024) for details. Changes are
calculated using 12-month rolling sums to smooth seasonal fluctuations.
ROW = rest of the world.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

27

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 1.1 (continued)
the United States and China—similar to 2018–19
(marked in solid lines). The decoupling also appears
to have been happening sooner than it did in the
previous episode. Meanwhile, there is an increase
in Chinese exports to third countries. Differences
between countries that may serve as China’s substitutes
relative to those that are China’s complements are not
yet obvious. Looking at the trade patterns through a
geographic lens rather than through structural similarities between different countries reveals some of the
underlying differences between the two tariff episodes
so far. In 2018–19, Asian and U.S.-Mexico-Canada
Agreement (USMCA) countries—many of which
fall into the China’s substitutes category—absorbed
China’s falling exports to the United States
(Figure 1.1.2, panel 1). Meanwhile, falling US exports
to China were accompanied by increases in other destinations, such as the European Union, together with
stable exports to Canada and Mexico (Figure 1.1.2,
panel 2). Early signals from the latest trade data point
to potentially faster trade shifts this time. For example,
Chinese exports to third-country markets—especially
in Asia and Europe—increased more in February–
April 2025 than in February–April 2018. At the same
time, Canada and Mexico have accounted for a small
share of China’s change in exports since February
2025 and have made a negative contribution to US
export growth, in contrast to 2018–19. High tariffs
on non-USMCA-compliant products and on steel and
aluminum content on a value-added basis, combined
with further tightening and enforcement of rules of
origin, may be partially responsible, along with other
factors.
It is too soon to assess the magnitude of a
longer-term reallocation—which in 2018–19 picked
up speed only after about 12 months. The extent of
shifts may be different this time because threats of
higher tariffs on exports to the United States have
affected most countries since January 2025—unlike
the China-specific changes to the US trade policy in
the 2018 episode—and overall policy uncertainty is

28

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 1.1.2. Change in Exports by Destination
Region and Tariff Episode
(Billions of US dollars)

250 1. Exports from China
200
150
100

United States
WH USMCA
WH non-USMCA
Asia-Pacific
Europe
Other

50
0
−50

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ Post-tariﬀ
longer
2018 tariﬀ episode

125 2. Exports from US
100
75
50

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ

2025 tariﬀ episode
China
WH USMCA
WH non-USMCA
Asia-Pacific
Europe
Other

25
0
−25

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ Post-tariﬀ
longer
2018 tariﬀ episode

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ

2025 tariﬀ episode

Sources: Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars show the total change in exports within each tariff period
(2018 and 2025, respectively). Segments indicate contributions from
each destination market. Changes are calculated using 12-month
rolling sums to smooth seasonal fluctuations. “Pre-tariff” refers to
the change from t − 3 months to t = −1; “Post-tariff” refers to the
change from t = 0 to t + 3 months; and “Post-tariff longer” refers to the
change from t = 0 to t + 22 months (available for 2018 only). USMCA =
U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement; WH = Western Hemisphere.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.1 (continued)
high, complicating firms’ reallocation decisions. In
addition, further actions are being taken to reduce
reallocation, including tighter rules of origin, customs
enforcement of transshipment, duties applied on value-added content, and extended screening procedures
for foreign direct investment.
Such shifts observed in gross trade data can also be
induced by other factors, many of which are unrelated to trade policy, including broader changes in the
countries’ competitiveness. At the aggregate level, the
observed increase in Chinese exports to third countries
is also not necessarily for the same products whose
exports to the United States dropped. In addition,
movements in exchange rates and relative prices may
affect the degree of reallocation in real terms. This preliminary analysis is, hence, illustrative, and will require
further analysis to isolate the role of different factors
once sufficient data become available. The pace and
geography of reallocation will also depend on frictions,
including policy choices by third countries. Model
simulations of long-term reallocation (Rotunno and
Ruta 2025) suggest that, once uncertainty is resolved,
China’s exports to non-US markets could increase by
4–6 percent in the baseline, with the extent and direction of diversion depending crucially on the distribution of tariffs and third-country policies.
While similar caveats apply to trends observed at
the sectoral level, early evidence suggests that trade
flows are already being redirected to Asia in several
important sectors targeted by tariff increases, including
automobiles and parts, and to Europe in steel and
aluminum (Figure 1.1.3). In addition, there is some
evidence that changes in third countries’ imports
from China in a given sector, including to Asia, are
correlated with the change in their exports in the same
sector to other regions, including the United States
and Europe. This may suggest that trade diversion to
other markets is larger than what is captured in gross
trade data and could be consistent with either trade
reallocation, trade rerouting, or a combination of
the two.

Figure 1.1.3. Change in China’s Exports by
Destination Region and Tariff Episode in
Selected Sectors
(Billions of US dollars)
United States
Asia-Pacific

WH USMCA
Europe

WH non-USMCA
Other

10 1. Automobiles and Parts

5

0

−5

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ Post-tariﬀ
longer
2018 tariﬀ episode

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ

2025 tariﬀ episode

15 2. Steel and Aluminum
10
5
0
−5

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ Post-tariﬀ
longer
2018 tariﬀ episode

Pre-tariﬀ

Post-tariﬀ

2025 tariﬀ episode

Sources: Trade Data Monitor; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bars show the total change in exports within each tariff period
(2018 and 2025, respectively). Segments indicate contributions from
each destination market. Changes are calculated using 12-month
rolling sums to smooth seasonal fluctuations. “Pre-tariff” refers to
the change from t − 3 months to t = −1; “Post-tariff” refers to the
change from t = 0 to t + 3 months; and “Post-tariff longer” refers to the
change from t = 0 to t + 22 months (available for 2018 only). USMCA =
U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement; WH = Western Hemisphere.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

29

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 1.2. Risk Assessment Surrounding the Baseline Projection
This box uses the IMF’s Group of Twenty (G20)
model to derive confidence bands around the World
Economic Outlook (WEO) baseline forecast and the
IMF’s Global Integrated Monetary and Fiscal (GIMF)
model to analyze shocks that could materialize over
the five-year WEO horizon. While the risk scenarios
presented in the April 2025 WEO remain relevant,
two new scenarios are also considered. Scenario A
combines policies and shocks that result in a fall
in global output and a narrowing in global imbalances relative to the baseline. Policies and shocks
in scenario B result in an increase in global output
relative to the baseline but do not have strong implications for imbalances.

Confidence Bands
The G20 model is used to generate distributions
around the baseline by drawing shocks recovered
from the underlying historical data (Andrle and Hunt
2020). The distribution is tilted to align with the
growth-at-risk assessment presented in the October
2025 Global Financial Stability Report. As in the
previous assessment, growth distributions are skewed
to the downside, with downside risks more likely than
upside risks, and inflation distributions are skewed to
the upside.
Panels 1 and 2 in Figure 1.2.1 show the distributions for US growth and headline inflation (90 percent
confidence bands represented in the blue-shaded
areas). Uncertainty about 2025 outcomes is lower,
since data for the first half of the year are in. The
probability of a recession occurring in 2026 is assessed
at about 30 percent, somewhat smaller than the recession probability estimated in the April 2025 WEO;
the risk that 2026 US headline inflation will rise above
3 percent is similar (about 30 percent).1
That said, the probability of recession and inflation
above 3 percent are larger than at the time of the
October 2024 WEO (25 and 20 percent, respectively).
Panels 3 and 4 in Figure 1.2.1 show the distributions for global growth and headline inflation.
The authors of this box are Jared Bebee, Dirk Muir, and Rafael
Portillo.
1The recession risk for 2026 is the probability that 2026
annual growth will be below 0.8 percent, consistent with a
shallow recession starting in the first quarter of 2026. The probability of a short-lived US recession (in 2025) was assessed to be
about 37 percent at the time of the April 2025 WEO.

30

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 1.2.1. Forecast Uncertainty around
Global Growth and Inflation Projections
(Percent)

WEO baseline projection
6 1. US GDP Growth
3
0
−3
2024

25

26

27

28

29

30

27

28

29

30

27

28

29

30

28

29

30

8 2. US Headline Inflation
6
4
2
0
−2
2024

25

26

6 3. Global GDP Growth
4
2
0
2024

25

26

8 4. Global Headline Inflation
6
4
2
0
−2
2024

25

26

27

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Each shade of blue represents a 5 percentage point
probability interval. WEO = World Economic Outlook.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.2 (continued)
The probability that global growth in 2026 will
fall below 2 percent is assessed at about 25 percent,
slightly lower than in April. The probability that 2026
global headline inflation will rise above 5 percent is
broadly similar, at about 25 percent. In summary,
downside risks to growth have receded slightly relative
to April but remain elevated, while upside risks to
inflation are broadly the same.

Scenarios
The GIMF model is used to assess risk scenarios.
As in April, the version of the model has 10 regions,
including China, the United States, and the euro
area. The scenarios assume monetary policy responds
endogenously, with floating exchange rates in most
regions. In scenario A, China’s currency is managed
through capital flow measures, with limited overall
adjustment of the renminbi relative to the dollar.
In scenario B, the renminbi adjusts as in a flexible
exchange rate regime. Automatic stabilizers operate on
the fiscal side. The model has been modified relative
to April to allow higher pass-through to capture inflation risks from tariffs and exchange rate movements.

Layers Considered in Scenario A
Higher tariffs and supply-chain disruptions. The scenario assumes permanently higher US tariffs than in
the baseline, starting at the end of 2025. The increase
in tariffs is the higher of either the tariff increases
announced in April or the tariff rates announced in
the letters sent in June and July. Imports from China
face the largest tariff hikes relative to the baseline,
close to 30 percentage points, followed by emerging
Asia, the euro area, and Japan, at about 10 percentage points. The effective tariff rate on US imports
increases by 10 percentage points overall, with tariff
revenue used to pay down public debt over the WEO
horizon. The scenario also assumes that countries do
not retaliate. In addition, the cumulative increase in
tariffs in both the baseline and the scenario leads to
a temporary disruption of global supply chains. Total
factor productivity in sectors more involved in global
trade (about 20 percent of global value added) falls by
1 percent, globally, in 2026–27, before returning to
baseline in 2028.
Higher inflation expectations. A confluence of factors
(the post–COVID-19 inflation surge, tariffs, concerns
about central bank independence) raises inflation

expectations in many countries in 2026 and 2027.
One-year-ahead inflation expectations increase by
60 basis points in emerging markets currently facing
inflation above target, 50 basis points in the United
States, and about 25 basis points in other advanced
economies, excluding Japan, and in the remaining
emerging markets, excluding China.
Higher sovereign yields. A reassessment of the global
economy’s capacity to absorb the historic increase in
public debt leads to an increase in sovereign yields.
Term premiums on public debt increase in all countries except China by 100 basis points, starting in
2026 and lasting 10 years. The safe/neutral global real
rate also increases gradually but permanently relative
to baseline, by up to 50 basis points and affecting all
countries equally. Fiscal policy does not adjust over the
WEO horizon, but public debt is eventually stabilized
at higher levels in most countries.
Tighter global financial conditions. The combined
effect of shocks and policies considered in this scenario
is amplified by additional tightening in global financial
conditions. Corporate spreads increase in 2026 by
50 basis points in advanced economies and China, and
by 100 basis points in emerging markets, excluding
China. The layer also includes a modest decline in
equity prices in the US, reflecting in part a correction
of AI stock valuations. The tightening lasts for two
years.
Lower global demand for US assets. Lower foreign
demand raises expected returns on US assets—a
partial loss of the “exorbitant privilege” of the United
States—by up to 80 basis points relative to baseline.
The increase in the US external risk premium lasts for
20 years.

Layers Considered in Scenario B
A return to low tariffs. Tariffs imposed since January
2025 are permanently removed, reducing effective tariff rates on US imports by about 15 percentage points
relative to the current baseline. Imports from China
see the largest decrease in effective tariff rates (about
22 percentage points), followed by Japan, Europe,
and emerging Asia (10–20 percentage points). Trading
partners also remove tariffs on US exports, and US
exports to China see a decrease in effective tariff rates
of about 20 percentage points.
Reduced trade policy uncertainty. Agreements coming
out of ongoing bilateral negotiations and multilateral

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

31

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 1.2 (continued)
initiatives provide greater predictability in global trade
arrangements, reducing economic uncertainty relative
to the baseline. The decrease in uncertainty is equivalent to a two-standard-deviation decrease in the global
economic policy uncertainty measure in Davis (2016),
or about the absolute size of the spike observed in
2018–19.
Higher-than-expected benefits from AI. The benefits
of artificial intelligence (AI) on global productivity and
investment are moderately larger than in the current
baseline. The layer features two components. First,
several countries see a modest increase in investment
in new AI-specific capital (information processing
equipment, software intellectual property), most
notably the United States and China. Second, global
productivity increases as AI is gradually deployed to
the broader economy. Global total factor productivity
increases by about 0.8 percent over a 10-year period,
at the lower range of existing estimates, with considerable cross-country variation. Countries more exposed
to gains in automation and better prepared for AI
adoption see larger productivity gains, drawing on the
assessment in Cerutti and others (2025).

Impact on the World Economy
Figures 1.2.2 and 1.2.4 present the effects, for scenarios A and B, on the level of GDP during 2025–30
and over the long term, for China, the United States,
the euro area, and the world. The effects of higher
sovereign yields and additional tightening in financial
conditions are merged into a single layer. Figure 1.2.3
shows the effects of scenario A on inflation, real interest rates, and current account balances of these three
regions, and the impact on the US dollar’s real effective exchange rate.2 The panels for current accounts
and the dollar also show the contribution from higher
tariffs and from lower demand for US assets.
In scenario A, higher tariffs reduce global goods
demand and disrupt supply. Global activity decreases
by 0.3 percent relative to baseline in 2026, with the
effect building through 2028, and with a permanent
loss in global GDP of one-half percent. China is most
affected among tariff-facing regions because of the
larger tariff hike and the limited adjustment assumed
2The real interest rate presented in Figure 1.2.3, panel 2 is the
sum of the one-year safe real rate and half the term premiums.

32

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 1.2.2. Impact of Scenario A on GDP
(Percent deviation from baseline)

Higher tariﬀs and supply disruptions
Add inflation expectations shock
Add higher sovereign yields/financial conditions
Add lower demand for US assets
0.4 1. United States
0
−0.4
−0.8
−1.2
−1.6
−2.0
−2.4
27
2025
26

28

29

30

Long
term

0.4 2. Euro Area
0
−0.4
−0.8
−1.2
−1.6
−2.0
−2.4
2025
26

27

28

29

30

Long
term

0.4 3. China
0
−0.4
−0.8
−1.2
−1.6
−2.0
−2.4
2025
26

27

28

29

30

Long
term

0.4 4. World
0
−0.4
−0.8
−1.2
−1.6
−2.0
−2.4
2025
26

27

28

29

30

Long
term

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: “Long term” is at least 50 years ahead.

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Box 1.2 (continued)
Figure 1.2.3. Impact of Scenario A in the
United States, China, and the Euro Area
United States

Euro Area

Figure 1.2.4. Impact of Scenario B on GDP
(Percent of GDP)

Low tariﬀs
Add low uncertainty
Add AI-driven investment surge

China

1.2 1. Inflation
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
0.8
0.4
0
−0.4
−0.8
−1.2
2025
26
27
28
29

3 1. United States
2
1
0
30

1.2 2. Real Interest Rate
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
0.8

28

29

30

Long
term

27

28

29

30

Long
term

27

28

29

30

Long
term

27

28

29

30

Long
term

1
0
26

27

28

29

30

3 3. Current Account in Percent of GDP
(Percentage point deviation from baseline)
2

−1
2025

26

3 3. China

1

2

0

1

−1
26

27

28

29

30

9 4. US Dollar Real Effective Exchange Rate
(Percent deviation from baseline)
6

0
−1
2025

26

3 4. World

3

2

0

1

−3
−6
2025

27

2

0

−2
2025

26

3 2. Euro Area

0.4

−0.4
2025

−1
2025

26

27

28

29

30

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Dashed lines refer to tariff layer of scenario. Dotted line
in panel 4 refers to “lower demand for US assets” layer of
scenario.

0
−1
2025

26

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: “Long term” is at least 50 years ahead. AI = artificial
intelligence.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

33

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 1.2 (continued)
in the renminbi-to-dollar rate, which also results in
a lower current account surplus than in the baseline.
Higher tariffs reduce production efficiency in the
United States and cause dollar appreciation that lowers
demand for US exports. The United States experiences
a moderate reduction in its current account deficit, in
part because the decline in investment is larger than
in other countries. The impact on the euro-area-wide
current account is limited.
Higher tariffs also lead to a temporary 40 basis
point surge in US inflation and a 20 basis point
increase in policy rates in 2026. China experiences a
sustained reduction in inflation of 40–50 basis points.
Other regions, including the euro area, experience a
modest increase in inflation of 10–20 basis points.
For countries facing shocks to inflation expectations, the resulting inflationary pressures elicit higher
nominal and real policy rates. A faster response in
prices relative to wages also contributes to a decrease
in purchasing power, adding to the negative impact on
aggregate demand. The impact is most pronounced in
emerging markets facing higher-than-target inflation and in the United States, which in 2026 sees
an additional increase of 30 basis points in inflation
and policy rates and a decrease in activity of about
0.4 percent from this shock alone. The impact on the
euro area is smaller and is negligible on China. Global
GDP is reduced by 0.3 percent in 2026, and global
inflation increases by 20 basis points. The impact on
activity fades as inflation is stabilized.
In the sovereign yields and global financial conditions
layer, the combination of higher real interest rates
and corporate spreads reduces global investment by
3 percent and GDP by 0.6 percent in 2026, relative
to the baseline. In the short term, the hit is larger in
emerging markets excluding China because corporate
spreads widen more, and smaller in China as term
premiums do not increase. The layer is also moderately
disinflationary, with global inflation falling by about
0.2 percentage point in 2026. The impact on the
United States and the euro area is similar to the global
average. Over the long term, all countries see a permanent decrease in GDP, of about 1.5 percent.
The impact of lower global demand for US assets
varies across regions. The United States experiences a
combination of higher domestic real interest rates and
a depreciation of the US dollar, which raises demand
for US exports but compresses domestic absorption,
lowers GDP somewhat, and reduces the US current
account deficit sizably. As global asset demand shifts

34

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

toward other regions, real interest rates outside the
United States decrease, including in the euro area.
Euro area GDP increases modestly, and its current
account surplus is lowered as domestic absorption
increases. China benefits more than other regions
in the short term. Under the assumption that the
exchange rate relative to the dollar is managed, the
renminbi depreciates in real effective terms, supporting
China’s external demand and limiting adjustment in
its current account.
The combined effect from shocks in the scenario is
a sizable decrease in world GDP in 2026, 1.2 percent
lower than baseline, with activity declining further
relative to baseline in 2027. The United States is hit
harder than China and the euro area as it experiences
a larger decrease in GDP, higher inflation, and higher
real interest rates. Other countries, including emerging markets, experience a decrease broadly similar in
magnitude to the one the world economy experiences.
The impact on the US dollar’s real effective exchange
rate is muted, reflecting the offsetting effect of various
shocks, and global imbalances narrow.
In scenario B, the return to low tariffs helps support activity globally, with gains in all three large
countries but largest in China in the short term. The
United States sees a temporary reduction in inflation
of about 60 basis points in 2026 and a 7 percent
depreciation of the dollar relative to baseline as US
demand for imports increase and the renminbi-dollar
rate adjusts. Global activity is further supported in
the short term by lower trade policy uncertainty, which
benefits all countries and raises global investment by
about 2 percent in 2026–27. Higher-than-expected
benefits from AI raise global GDP by about 0.3 percent
in 2026, with global investment increasing by an
additional 1.5 percent over 2026–27. The increase in
short-term activity and investment is somewhat larger
in the United States and China than in the euro area,
and with limited impact on inflation. The economic
gains build over time as productivity rises.
The combined effect from layers in scenario B
is an increase in global GDP of about 1 percent in
2026 and about 2 percent over the long term, with
the return to low tariffs explaining about 0.7 percentage point of the increase and higher-than-expected
benefits from AI explaining 1.4 percentage points.
Finally, global imbalances do not change much in this
scenario, as the shocks considered generate relatively
small cross-country variation and exchange rates play a
larger role in global adjustment.

Commodity Special Feature  Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations

Commodity Special Feature: Market Developments and
Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
Primary commodity prices declined by 2.6 percent
between March and August 2025, with large gains in
precious metals partly offsetting a broad-based decline
in other commodity groups, including energy, base
metals, and agriculture. In oil markets, strong global
supply and tepid global demand growth have contributed to bringing prices down, despite ongoing geopolitical ructions. Tariffs drove some commodities lower,
especially base metals. This Special Feature analyzes
the importance of interlinkages between commodity
sectors and the rest of the economy in understanding
cyclical fluctuations following commodity price shocks.

Commodity Market Developments
Oil prices decreased 5.4 percent between March 2025
and August 2025 as tepid global demand growth and
strong supply growth from both OPEC+ and non-OPEC+
contributed to bringing prices down. Barring the temporary price spike in mid-June from the Israel-Iran war,
oil prices have been range-bound, trading between
$60 and $70 since the US announcement of tariffs
in early April. The tariff announcements induced a
decrease in global demand expectations and coincided
with the start of an accelerated production schedule
from OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries plus selected nonmember countries,
including Russia). Bearish fundamentals are now
mostly in focus: The International Energy Agency is
forecasting 0.7 mb/d (million barrels per day) of global
demand growth in 2025 and 1.4 mb/d of non-OPEC+
supply growth, while the latest OPEC+ production
schedule gradually brought back 2.5 mb/d through
September,1 one year ahead of schedule, with plans to
further increase production. Talks to find a diplomatic
solution to the war in Ukraine have stalled, increasing
the risk of US secondary sanctions. US futures markets
indicate that oil prices will average $68.90 per barrel
The contributors to this Special Feature are Christian Bogmans,
Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, Vida Maver, Jorge Miranda Pinto,
Jean-Marc Natal (team lead), and Andrea Paloschi, with research
assistance from Francis Cuadros Bloch, Ganchimeg Ganpurev,
Maximiliano Jerez Osses, and Joseph Moussa. This Special Feature is
based on Gomez-Gonzalez and others (2025).
12.2 mb/d of gradual unwinding of production cuts, combined
with a 0.3 mb/d higher production quota for the United Arab
Emirates.

Figure 1.SF.1. Commodity Market Developments
400 1. Commodity Prices
(Index, 2016 = 100, US CPI adjusted)
300
200

All commodities
Base metals
Food
Energy

100
0
2015 16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

90 2. Brent Crude Oil Price Forecasts
(US dollars per barrel; expiration dates on x-axis)
April 2024 WEO
October 2024 WEO
April 2025 WEO
October 2025 WEO

80

70

60
2025

26

27

28

29

30

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Haver Analytics; IMF, Primary Commodity Price
System; International Energy Agency; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: In panel 1, latest actual CPI value is applied to forecasts, represented by the
dashed portions of the graph lines. CPI = consumer price index; WEO = World
Economic Outlook.

in 2025, a 12.9 percent decline from the previous
year, before decreasing to $65.80 in 2026 and steadily
increasing to $67.30 through 2030 (Figure 1.SF.1,
panel 2). Risks around this forecast are balanced.
While potential Russian supply disruptions present an
upside risk to prices, the risk of accelerated OPEC+
supply increases, combined with the tariff-induced
cloudy global economic environment, continue to
pressure prices downward. All the while, higher-cost
producers set a loose price floor, with some US breakeven prices in the low to mid $60s.
Natural gas prices fell reflecting tariffs and ample
supply. Title Transfer Facility (TTF) trading hub prices
in Europe dropped 16.6 percent between March 2025
and August 2025 to $11.0 per million British thermal
units (MMBtu). Despite a temporary spike in June
amid the Israel-Iran war, TTF prices fell on lower
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

35

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

energy demand because of tariff-induced business
uncertainty, weaker competing demand from Asia, and
the approval of more flexible EU gas storage targets.
Asian liquefied natural gas prices tracked the decreasing trend in European prices, falling by 12.2 percent.
US Henry Hub prices fell by 30 percent to $2.9 per
MMBtu owing to trade-policy-induced demand uncertainty and record-high domestic production. Futures
markets suggest that TTF prices will average $12.1/
MMBtu in 2025, steadily decreasing to $8.4/MMBtu
in 2030, reflecting ample global liquefied natural gas
supply in the medium term, with US export capacity
expected to almost double through 2027. Henry Hub
prices are expected to fluctuate around $3.5/MMBtu
between 2025 and 2030.
Safe haven demand lifted precious metals, whereas
tariffs drove base metal prices lower. The IMF’s metals price index rose 6.8 percent between March and
August 2025 (Figure 1.SF.1, panel 1). Precious metals
drove this increase, with gold increasing 12.8 percent,
reaching record highs above $3,400/ounce as investors
sought safe haven assets amid rising geopolitical uncertainty and central banks increased gold reserves. US
import tariffs had mixed effects on base metals. While
US tariffs announced in early April pressured global
prices downward, 50 percent tariffs on steel, aluminum, and copper triggered front-loading by the United
States, providing some support to prices. Futures markets suggest modest increases of 0.3 percent in 2025
and 3.0 percent in 2026.
China’s rare earth export controls trigger price spikes.
Top producer China launched export licensing requirements for seven critical rare earth elements and their
corresponding magnets in April, causing dramatic
export slowdowns during April and May. Following a
US-China trade agreement on June 11, Chinese magnet exports rebounded in June and had fully recovered
by July, rising 5 percent year over year. Price impacts
have persisted for key magnet materials however. Rare
earth carbonate feedstock prices also jumped 30.2
percent as reduced US raw material exports to China
tightened global supplies of processed rare earths amid
strengthening demand.
After a strong start to the year, agricultural commodities declined, thanks to ample supplies and the
tariffs. From March to August 2025, the IMF’s
food and beverages price index fell by 4.8 percent,
led by sharp declines in coffee, cereal, and sugar
prices. This reversed early-year gains, when coffee
and cocoa prices surged because of bad weather

36

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

in major exporters and tight global supply. Cereal
prices dropped by 11.1 percent amid strong harvest
prospects in major producing countries, such as the
United States, Russia, Brazil, and Argentina. Coffee
prices plunged by 16.7 percent, with the IMF Coffee
Index retreating from its February historic high as
supply prospects improved in top producer Brazil and
as US tariff uncertainty grew. Despite this downward
trend, prices surged briefly in August, following US
tariffs on Brazil that caused trade disruptions. Meanwhile, corn prices fell 11.9 percent, pressured by
Brazil’s large harvest in the second quarter and promising crop conditions in the United States. Upside
risks to the food price outlook could stem from
new export restrictions, which might raise global
prices by tightening international supply—even as
they put downward pressure on food prices in some
exporting countries—and because of potential bad
weather resulting from La Niña in the fourth quarter.
Larger-than-expected harvests and higher tariffs pose
the main downside risk.

Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic
Fluctuations in Advanced and Emerging
Markets: Does Size Matter?
Commodities play a central yet often underappreciated role in shaping macroeconomic fluctuations across
both advanced and emerging market and developing
economies, with the latter generally experiencing
greater macroeconomic volatility. In the context of
today’s climate-related supply shocks and geopolitical
and trade tensions, understanding the macroeconomic
impact of commodity price fluctuations matters more
than ever. And this requires looking beyond the sheer
size of the commodity sector. Crucial to understanding the effect of commodity price shocks on output
and inflation is how interconnected the sector is with
the rest of the economy and the rest of the world (for
example, Baqaee and Farhi 2019; Bigio and La’O
2020; Silva 2024; Silva and others 2024; Romero
2025; Qiu and others 2025). These interlinkages shape
the reallocation of labor and capital across sectors in
response to a commodity price movement and play a
critical role in driving fluctuations in real activity and
inflation. The degree of interconnection between the
commodity sector and the broader economy determines the extent of cyclical amplification and persistence following a commodity price shock—and how
monetary policy should respond.

Commodity Special Feature  Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations

Relying on a mix of empirical analysis and general equilibrium modeling, this Commodity Special
Feature will seek to answer three questions: (1) How
do commodity sectors’ linkages with the broader
economy differ between emerging market and developing economies and advanced economies and across
different commodities? (2) How do these linkages (upand downstream) affect the propagation of commodity
price shocks to the rest of the economy? and (3) How
should monetary policy respond?

Size and Interconnectedness of Commodity
Sectors in Advanced Economies and Emerging
Market and Developing Economies
It is well established that, on average, emerging
market and developing economies have much larger
commodity sectors than advanced economies (for
example, Kohn, Leibovici, and Tretvoll 2021).2 The
average size, or Domar3 weight, of the commodity
sectors in emerging market and developing economies
is twice as large for metals, three times as large for
energy, and almost four times as large for agriculture
compared with advanced economies (see Online Annex
Table SF.1.1 in Online Annex 1.1).4 But are commodity sectors also more interconnected in emerging market
and developing economies—and could this greater
interconnectedness help explain their seemingly larger
impact on economic fluctuations?
Answering this question requires examining their
role within the broader production network—both
upstream as suppliers to other sectors and downstream
as purchasers of inputs. For example, an increase in
copper prices encourages mining and extraction activities in countries that produce copper. This typically
results in greater demand for industrial machinery,
construction, transportation, and financial services, all
inputs to the copper industry. Higher copper prices
also affect a wide range of downstream industries. And
this matters to the extent these industries may also
ultimately influence the overall cost associated with
copper extraction. For instance, higher copper prices
will increase construction costs, which will in turn
2In this Commodity Special Feature, the commodity sectors are
broken down into energy (mining and petroleum products), metals
(mining and fabricated metal products), and agricultural products.
3Domar weights are defined as the ratio of sectoral gross output to
national GDP (Domar 1961).
4All online annexes are available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/
WEO.

increase industrial machinery’s production costs—an
input to the production of copper. The degree of interconnectedness of the commodity sector is measured by
its network-adjusted value-added share (NAVAS) (Silva
and others 2024; Qiu and others 2025), or the sector’s
total (direct and indirect) exposure to the economy’s
factors of production (see Online Annex 1.1 for a
formal definition).5
The commodity sector NAVAS is larger than its size
(Domar weight) in both advanced and emerging market economies, but the differences in NAVAS across
both groups tend to be smaller than the differences
in size.6 This suggests that its significance for macroeconomic fluctuations in advanced economies may be
larger than it appears at first glance (Figure 1.SF.2).
There is also a large overlap between the right tail of
the distribution of the NAVAS in advanced economies
and the left tail in emerging market and developing
economies, meaning that commodity sectors in many
advanced economies are more interconnected than in
emerging market and developing economies and that
commodity price shocks in these advanced economies
may have a larger and more persistent effect on economic activity (Figure 1.SF.2, panel 2).

Understanding Consumption Patterns Depends
on Commodity Sector Interconnectedness,
Not Size
Figure 1.SF.3, panel 1, displays the relationship
between the NAVAS (horizontal axis) and the correlation between countries’ cyclical consumption and
commodities’ terms of trade (commodity net export
price index). As suggested in the previous section,
countries with a more interconnected commodity sector (higher NAVAS) display stronger annual correlation
between aggregate consumption and commodities
terms of trade, and some advanced economies (for
example, Australia, New Zealand, Canada) have larger
NAVAS and co-movement than emerging market and

5Online Annex 1.1 shows that varying the importance of the commodity sector as supplier of inputs to the rest of the economy has
no impact on the NAVAS provided these sectors do not eventually
feedback to the commodity sector’s upstream suppliers.
6The average commodity sector is three times larger (Domar
weight) in emerging market and developing economies than in
advanced economies, but its network-adjusted value-added share
(NAVAS) is only 31 percent higher, with energy exhibiting the
biggest difference across country groups and metals and agricultural
products the smallest.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

37

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 1.SF.2. Size and Network-Adjusted Value-Added
Share across Country Groups
AEs

Figure 1.SF.3. Importance of Interconnectedness over Size

Correlation (Log C, Log P)

Frequency (number of countries)

8 1. Size across Country Groups
7
6
5
4
3
2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6
Share (0 to 1)

0.8

1.0

1.2

4

−0.4

CHE
ZAF

HUN

−0.6

NZL

POL
0.3

0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Network-adjusted value-added share (NAVAS)

0.9

1.0

2. Local Projections Impulse Response to Terms-of-Trade Shock
Terms-of-trade shock × 2018
commodity sector size
Terms-of-trade shock × 2018
0.20
commodity sector NAVAS
Terms-of-trade shock
0.15

3

0.10

2

0.05
0

1
0

BGR

−0.2

0.25

5 2. NAVAS across Country Groups
Frequency (number of countries)

0

−0.8
0.2

1
0

1. Correlation between Consumption and Terms of Trade as a
Function of Interconnectedness; AEs versus EMs
KAZ
NOR
Commodity net importer
0.6
Commodity net exporter
0.4
AUS
CAN
VNM
0.2
THA
0.8

EMs

−0.05
0

0.2

0.4

0.6
Share (0 to 1)

0.8

1.0

1.2

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Input-Output
Tables, 2018; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The Domar weight is the ratio of the nominal value of the commodity sector
gross output to GDP. NAVAS is the sum of commodity sector value-added (VA) share
and commodity suppliers’ VA shares weighted by the Leontief inverse elements that
capture downstream and upstream linkages of the commodity sector. AEs = advanced
economies; EMs = emerging markets; NAVAS = network-adjusted value-added share.

developing economies (for example, Bulgaria, Hungary,
Poland, South Africa).
Interestingly, and maybe counterintuitively, the correlation is sometimes negative, even for commodity net
exporters (for example South Africa); this point will be
discussed further in the next subsection using a general
equilibrium model.
Figure 1.SF.3, panel 2, confirms that interconnectedness (NAVAS) matters for the effect of commodity
price shocks on consumption, even after controlling
for the role of size (Domar weights). Coefficient estimates at different horizons (based on local projection
analysis; Jordà 2005) show that the NAVAS interaction
coefficient—which measures the marginal impact of
deeper interconnectedness on the response of consumption to terms-of-trade changes—is substantially

38

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Year 1

Year 2

Year 3

Year 4

Year 5

Year 6

Sources: Global Macro Database (Müller and others 2025); IMF, Commodity Terms of
Trade Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the correlation between countries’ cyclical consumption and
cyclical terms of trade, computed for 66 countries covering the period 1990–2023 with
an annual frequency. The network-adjusted value-added share (NAVAS) used is from
the year 2018. Sectoral value-added shares are measured using the ratio between
gross output minus intermediate input usage and gross output. Terms of trade are
measured by the Commodity Net Export Price Index, weighted by net exports as a
share of GDP and deflated using the US consumer price index. Advanced economies
are shown in blue, while emerging markets are shown in red. In addition, squares
represent commodity net importers, while circles indicate commodity net exporters.
Panel 2 presents consumption coefficient estimates from panel local projections at
annual horizons, along with their respective standard deviations, in response to a
one-standard-deviation terms-of-trade shock. The terms-of-trade shock is constructed
following Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2018) using the residual of an autoregressive
process of order one for each country’s log terms-of-trade index, deflated by US
consumer price index. Estimates are shown for the direct terms-of-trade shock, its
interaction with the NAVAS, and its interaction with the Domar weight in yellow, red,
and blue, respectively. See Online Annex 1.1, Parts I and II for further details. Data
labels in the figure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country
codes. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets.

larger than the coefficient for the size interaction and is
always significant.
Specific country examples tend to confirm this
finding. For instance, although Thailand’s commodity
sector is six times larger than Switzerland’s, their NAVAS
values are almost identical (0.68 in Thailand and 0.65 in
Switzerland), resulting in a very similar impact of termsof-trade shocks on consumption (see Figure 1.SF.3,

Commodity Special Feature  Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations

Model-Based Analysis
The small open economy dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium model developed in Silva and
others (2024) and Gomez-Gonzalez and others (2025)
is employed to unpack the channels through which
production network structure affects the transmission
of commodity price shocks to the rest of the economy. In the model, households consume a final good
produced with labor, commodities, and imported
and domestic intermediate goods. Households save
in foreign assets, which accumulate according to the
small open economy’s successive current account
surpluses or deficits. The real interest rate is given
and fixed. Calibration uses the same Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development data
featured in Figure 1.SF.2, covering 66 countries and
44 sectors and is set to match each country’s sectoral
final consumption shares, input-output shares, and
the commodity sector’s net exports, all in 2018.7 Once
calibrated, the model is used to run two experiments.
First, it looks at the relationship between NAVAS and
the co-movement between consumption and commodity terms of trade. Model simulations (Figure 1.SF.4)
show very similar results to raw data (Figure 1.SF.3,
panel 1): The slope is positive (emerging market and
developing economies tend to have higher NAVAS and
higher correlation of cyclical consumption and termsof-trade shocks), and some advanced economies do
display higher NAVAS and stronger co-movement than
emerging market and developing economies. There is
some variation in the correlation of consumption with
commodity price shocks for the same level of interconnectedness (NAVAS), which suggests a complex propagation mechanism, which is analyzed further below.

7The model’s rich network structure and dynamic consumption decision make it well equipped to study the transmission of
commodity price shocks through factor prices and the valuation of
debt. While it abstracts from factors such as unemployment and
time-varying profit margins, these simplifications allow for a focused
analysis of network propagation mechanisms. Because six commodity
sectors are aggregated into one here, the benchmark calibration has 1
commodity sector and 38 non-commodity sectors.

Figure 1.SF.4. Model-Based Consumption Response to a
1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Price Shock
(Percent change)
2.0

Advanced economies
Emerging markets

1.5
Aggregate consumption response

panel 1). Similarly, the Norwegian energy sector exhibits
a NAVAS of 0.94, significantly larger than Vietnam’s
(0.48), despite their similar size. And as expected, shocks
to energy prices are more correlated with consumption
in Norway than in Vietnam (Online Annex 1.1, Online
Annex Figure 1.SF.1).

1.0
0.5

VNM

0

BGR

−0.5

HUN POL THA

NZL

CAN
CHE ZAF

NOR

AUS KAZ

−1.0
−1.5
−2.0
−2.5

0

0.2

0.4
0.6
NAVAS commodity sector

0.8

1.0

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: NAVAS is the network-adjusted value-added share of the commodity sector.
Consumption response is the first-period reaction of real consumption to a 1 percent
terms-of-trade shock. Data labels in the figure use International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) country codes.

Second, the model is used to look under the hood
and better understand the transmission mechanism of
shocks to commodity prices. To emphasize the importance of the NAVAS in driving co-movements between
commodity terms-of-trade shocks and consumption
(Figure 1.SF.3, panel 1), the model is run for two
commodity net exporters whose commodity sectors
are of similar size (39 percent of GDP)—Kazakhstan
and South Africa—but with the Kazakh commodity
sector more strongly interconnected (NAVAS of 0.90
versus 0.73 for South Africa). Figure 1.SF.5—which
displays impulse response functions to a 1 percent
commodity terms-of-trade shock—shows that the
impact on aggregate consumption of a commodity
price shock is positive and large in Kazakhstan but is
negative in South Africa. Analysis of the transmission
mechanism—which runs through both prices and
wages—is essential to understanding this seemingly
counterintuitive result.
Note first that real wages increase in both countries
(nominal wages increase more than prices) because
higher revenues in the commodity sector boost labor
demand and real wages in equilibrium. However, the
final impact of the shock on consumption does not
depend only on labor income but also on the impact
of the shock on households’ real wealth (net foreign

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

39

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 1.SF.5. Model-Based Impulse Responses to a
1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Shock
(Percent change)

1.5 1. Aggregate Price and Wage Reaction to a 1 Percent
Terms-of-Trade Shock
Agg. price KAZ
Agg. price ZAF
Wage KAZ
Wage ZAF

1.0

0.5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Periods

0.4 2. Aggregate Consumption and Current Account Reaction to a
1 Percent Terms-of-Trade Shock
Agg. consumption KAZ
0.3
Agg. consumption ZAF
Current account KAZ
0.2
Current account ZAF
0.1
0
−0.1

1

2

3

4

5

6

7 8

9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Periods

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The figure illustrates the impact of a commodity price shock on two distinct
exporting economies, both calibrated to start with an equal initial trade balance. The
calibration is based on each economy’s input-output structure. Agg. = aggregate;
KAZ = Kazakhstan; ZAF = South Africa.

assets denominated in units of real commodity goods).8
In South Africa, the aggregate price index increases
more than commodity prices on impact (more than
1 percent; see Figure 1.SF.5, panel 1), leading to a
decline in the real value of net foreign assets—a negative wealth shock from the perspective of South African
consumers—and a decline in consumption.9
But what explains this larger increase in aggregate
prices in South Africa? The key lies in the way factor
price changes propagate and become diluted through
the production network. In general equilibrium, any
exogenous increase in commodity prices will be met
by a commensurate increase in marginal costs in the
8This relates to Drechsel and Tenreyro (2018) and Di Pace, Juvenal, and Petrella (2025), who show that increases in export prices
have positive effects on net foreign asset position.
9The negative co-movement between consumption and commodity terms-of-trade prices in South Africa aligns with the empirical
evidence in Figure 1.SF.3.

40

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

commodity sector until excess profit is driven to zero.
Because higher marginal costs stem from both factor
prices (wages in the model) and intermediate input
prices, a higher NAVAS implies greater interconnectedness of the commodity sector, a larger contribution of
intermediate input prices to marginal cost fluctuations,
and thus a smaller increase in wages required for any
given rise in marginal costs. In low-NAVAS economies, such as South Africa, commodity price shocks
feed more directly into factor costs—rather than being
diluted along the supply chain via intermediate input
prices—resulting in larger aggregate price increases.10
Low-NAVAS countries will tend to see larger increases
in aggregate prices, lower real net foreign assets, and
therefore a smaller wealth effect.
To sum up, differences in commodity sector linkages
as measured by the NAVAS drive the differences in
macroeconomic responses to commodity price fluctuations.11 On balance, the wealth effect could even
be negative and could more than offset the positive
income effect, leading to a drop in consumption, as
in South Africa (Figures 1.SF.3, panel 1, and 1.SF.5),
and this is true regardless of the size of the sector as
measured by Domar weights.

Implications for Monetary Policy in Small Open
Economies
While higher commodity prices typically exert
upward pressure on inflation, their effect on consumption varies with the commodity sector’s NAVAS—
amplifying or dampening the transmission, depending
on the economy’s structure. This raises important
questions about how monetary policy should respond
to commodity price shocks.
Standard theory suggests that monetary policy
should respond only to inflation occurring in sticky
price sectors and should ignore fluctuations in
10An increase in marginal costs in the commodity sector can arise
either from small increments in intermediate input prices—driven by
modest wage increases along the supply chain—or from a large direct
increase in wages that takes place in all sectors simultaneously given
perfect labor mobility across sectors. The latter exerts a stronger
effect on aggregate prices.
11For more details see Gomez-Gonzalez and others (2025), in
which the authors show how these effects change when the country
is instead a commodity importer and when considering productivity
shocks to the commodity sector. The authors also discuss the heterogeneity in energy, metals, and agricultural commodity linkages across
groups of economies. Finally, the authors show that the relationship
between NAVAS and the consumption response to terms-of-trade
shocks is robust to denominating foreign assets in units of the
importable goods instead of in units of the exportable goods.

Commodity Special Feature  Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations

12For more on incomplete pass-through, see, for example, Choi
and others (2018) for oil (among many others), Miranda-Pinto and
others (2024) for metals, and Hyun and Lee (2023) for agricultural
products.
13Rubbo (2023) shows that—using sectoral (Domar) weights (and
measures of sectoral price stickiness) to adjust the consumer price
index (CPI)—a new CPI can be constructed. Stabilizing this new
price index also closes the output gap and is therefore optimal from
the point of view of monetary policy.
14The welfare losses from following a closed economy policy
prescription in a small open economy environment are described by
the monetary policy mistake (PM), defined as PM = k(1 – NAVAS)
+ export intensity – expenditure switching. For more details, please
refer to Online Annex 1.1, Part IV.
15For instance, the average size of the commodity sector in
advanced economies is 13 percent, but because the average monetary
policy mistake is 34 percent, the actual weight should be 8.6 percent.
For emerging market and developing economies, the average size of
the commodity sector is 39 percent, but given an average monetary
policy mistake of 24 percent, the actual weight should be 30 percent.

Figure 1.SF.6. Monetary Policy Mistake Distribution, 2018
(Percent)

Kernel density estimate of the monetary policy mistake in the commodity sector.
3.0

AEs

EMs

2.5
2.0
Density

commodity prices because these sectors display flexible
prices that are not influenced much by monetary
policy (Aoki 2001; Woodford 2003). However, while
it is true that global commodity prices are flexible and
highly responsive to shocks, the pass-through to domestic commodity sectors is incomplete, and domestic
commodity prices are stickier.12
The question then becomes how much weight policymakers should assign to commodity price fluctuations in the conduct of monetary policy. As shown by
Rubbo (2023), Domar weights may be a good guide
in a closed economy.13 But relying on them to design
monetary policy in small open economies, instead of
the network-adjusted weight (NAW)—which depends
on the NAVAS—would lead to welfare losses that are
inversely proportional to the NAVAS (Qiu and others
2025).14 The reason is that when the commodity sector’s NAVAS is low—meaning it relies more on foreign
than on domestic factors of production (directly and
indirectly)—there is no need to respond to commodity
price fluctuations since they do not lead to commensurate output gap fluctuations.
A small open economy policymaker following the
prescription for a closed economy (adjusting monetary policy guided by Domar weights) would typically
be overestimating the importance of commodity price
fluctuations in the conduct of monetary policy, and the
degree of overreaction would be inversely proportional
to the NAVAS. Using the data presented in Figure
1.SF.2, Figure 1.SF.6 reports the distribution of the
“policy mistake” made by relying on size instead of the
NAW. The figure shows that both groups of economies would make monetary policy mistakes by overweighting the commodity sector by roughly a third.15

1.5
1.0
0.5
0
−0.5
−0.2

0

0.2
0.4
Percent deviation optimal weight

0.6

0.8

Sources: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Underlying calculations, based on the work of Qiu and others (2025), illustrate the
monetary policy errors that occur when the focus is solely on the size of the commodity
sector. The horizontal axis represents the policy mistakes expressed as the difference
between the Domar weight and network-adjusted weight as a proportion of the Domar
weight. AEs = advanced economies. EMs = emerging markets.

Specifically, advanced economies tend to overestimate
(by 32 percent, on average) the importance of the
commodity sector in monetary policy design, compared
with emerging market and developing economies (by
27 percent, on average).

Conclusion
The macroeconomic impact of commodity price
shocks depends less on the size of the commodity
sector than on how interconnected it is with the rest
of the economy. The network-adjusted value-added
share (NAVAS) captures this interconnectedness and
explains cross-country differences in how consumption
responds to commodity price fluctuations.
For policymakers, the main takeaway is that macroeconomic frameworks should be adapted to account
for the structure of domestic production networks. In
particular, central banks should account for production
network structures when calibrating their response to
commodity price movements. Doing so can reduce
the risk of policy miscalibration and enhance macroeconomic stability across both advanced and emerging
market economies, regardless of their net commodity
trade position.
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

41

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Annex Table 1.1.1. European Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Real GDP

Consumer Prices1

Projections

Current Account Balance2

Projections

Unemployment3

Projections

Projections

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

1.9

1.5

1.6

7.8

6.2

4.6

2.5

1.9

1.9

...

...

...

1.1
0.9
–0.5
1.1
0.7
3.5
1.1

1.3
1.2
0.2
0.7
0.5
2.9
1.4

1.3
1.1
0.9
0.9
0.8
2.0
1.2

2.3
2.4
2.5
2.3
1.1
2.9
3.2

2.2
2.1
2.1
1.1
1.7
2.4
2.9

2.0
1.9
1.8
1.5
2.0
2.0
2.4

3.1
2.6
5.6
0.1
1.1
3.2
9.1

2.7
2.3
5.4
–0.1
1.0
2.7
9.5

2.7
2.2
5.1
–0.2
1.0
2.6
9.3

5.8
6.4
3.4
7.4
6.6
11.3
3.7

6.0
6.4
3.7
7.6
6.7
10.8
3.8

5.9
6.3
3.4
7.5
6.7
10.7
4.0

Belgium
Ireland
Austria
Portugal
Greece

1.0
2.6
–1.0
1.9
2.3

1.1
9.1
0.3
1.9
2.0

1.0
1.3
0.8
2.1
2.0

4.3
1.3
2.9
2.7
3.0

2.6
1.7
3.6
2.2
3.1

1.3
1.7
2.3
2.1
2.5

–0.9
16.2
2.4
2.1
–7.0

–0.9
11.1
1.8
1.8
–5.8

–0.9
11.5
2.2
1.9
–5.3

5.7
4.3
5.2
6.5
10.1

6.1
4.6
5.7
6.4
9.0

6.2
4.6
5.6
6.3
8.4

Finland
Slovak Republic
Croatia
Lithuania
Slovenia

0.4
2.1
3.9
2.7
1.7

0.5
0.9
3.1
2.7
1.1

1.3
1.7
2.7
2.9
2.3

1.0
3.2
4.0
0.9
2.0

1.8
4.2
4.4
3.6
2.5

1.9
3.3
2.8
3.1
2.4

0.0
–2.8
–1.2
2.5
4.5

0.1
–2.9
–1.6
2.1
2.9

–0.1
–2.5
–2.0
2.1
2.9

8.4
5.4
5.3
7.1
3.7

9.0
5.5
5.0
6.6
3.8

8.7
5.6
5.0
6.1
4.0

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta

0.4
–0.4
–0.1
3.4
6.8

1.2
1.0
0.5
2.9
3.9

2.1
2.2
1.5
2.8
3.9

2.3
1.3
3.7
2.3
2.4

2.3
3.8
5.1
0.7
2.4

2.2
2.6
4.3
1.3
2.0

6.9
–1.6
–1.2
–8.4
5.5

12.2
–2.1
–0.9
–8.5
5.1

12.4
–2.3
–2.2
–9.1
4.4

5.8
6.9
7.5
4.9
3.1

6.1
6.7
7.9
4.5
2.5

6.2
6.6
7.4
4.7
2.5

United Kingdom
Switzerland
Sweden
Czech Republic
Norway

1.1
1.4
0.8
1.2
2.1

1.3
0.9
0.7
2.3
1.2

1.3
1.3
1.9
2.0
1.6

2.5
1.1
2.0
2.4
3.1

3.4
0.1
2.3
2.5
2.4

2.5
0.6
1.6
2.3
2.4

–2.7
7.7
5.9
1.7
16.7

–3.1
7.0
5.8
0.6
16.2

–3.0
7.0
5.7
0.4
15.9

4.3
2.4
8.4
2.6
4.0

4.7
2.9
9.0
2.5
4.3

4.7
3.1
8.4
2.4
4.2

Denmark
Iceland
Liechtenstein
Andorra
San Marino

3.5
–1.0
1.5
3.4
0.7

1.8
1.4
1.0
2.4
1.0

2.2
2.3
1.5
1.6
1.3

1.3
5.9
1.1
3.1
1.2

1.9
4.2
0.1
2.2
2.0

2.1
3.1
0.6
1.8
2.0

12.2
–2.6
14.6
15.0
18.3

12.2
–3.6
13.2
15.2
17.5

11.7
–1.1
12.9
15.3
17.8

2.9
3.4
2.7
1.5
4.4

3.0
3.9
2.7
1.6
4.4

3.0
4.0
2.7
1.6
4.5

Emerging and Developing Europe6
Russia
Türkiye
Poland
Romania
Ukraine7

3.5
4.3
3.3
2.9
0.8
2.9

1.8
0.6
3.5
3.2
1.0
2.0

2.2
1.0
3.7
3.1
1.4
4.5

16.9
8.4
58.5
3.7
5.6
6.5

13.5
9.0
34.9
3.8
7.3
12.6

9.3
5.2
24.7
2.8
6.7
7.6

–0.1
2.9
–0.8
0.0
–8.4
–7.2

–1.1
1.7
–1.4
–0.7
–8.0
–16.5

–1.0
1.6
–1.3
–0.8
–6.6
–12.6

...
2.5
8.7
2.9
5.4
13.1

...
2.4
8.3
2.9
5.9
11.6

...
3.1
8.3
3.1
5.8
10.2

Hungary
Belarus
Bulgaria
Serbia

0.5
4.0
2.8
3.9

0.6
2.1
3.0
2.4

2.1
1.4
3.1
3.6

3.7
5.7
2.6
4.7

4.5
7.0
3.6
4.6

3.5
7.5
3.4
4.0

2.2
–3.2
–1.6
–4.7

1.2
–1.8
–3.8
–5.3

0.9
–3.1
–3.2
–5.3

4.5
3.0
4.2
8.6

4.3
2.9
3.5
8.6

4.2
2.9
3.4
8.6

Europe
Advanced Europe
Euro Area4,5
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
The Netherlands

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.

3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.

4Current account position corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.
5 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices, except for Slovenia.

6 Includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, and North Macedonia.

7 See the country-specific note for Ukraine in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

42

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.2. Asian and Pacific Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Real GDP

Consumer Prices1

Projections

Current Account Balance2

Projections

Unemployment3

Projections

Projections

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

4.6

4.5

4.1

2.1

1.6

2.1

2.6

2.9

2.5

...

...

...

Advanced Asia
Japan
Korea
Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore

1.6
0.1
2.0
1.0
4.8
4.4

1.6
1.1
0.9
1.8
3.7
2.2

1.4
0.6
1.8
2.1
2.1
1.8

2.6
2.7
2.3
3.2
2.2
2.4

2.5
3.3
2.0
2.6
1.7
0.9

2.1
2.1
1.8
3.0
1.6
1.3

5.3
4.8
5.3
–1.9
14.1
17.5

5.0
3.9
4.8
–1.8
13.8
17.4

4.7
3.6
3.9
–1.7
13.1
17.3

2.9
2.6
2.8
4.0
3.4
2.0

3.0
2.6
3.0
4.2
3.4
2.1

3.0
2.6
3.0
4.3
3.4
2.1

Hong Kong SAR
New Zealand
Macao SAR

2.5
–0.6
8.8

2.4
0.8
2.6

2.1
2.2
2.8

1.7
2.9
0.7

1.7
2.7
0.5

2.1
2.1
1.2

13.0
–6.1
35.8

12.5
–4.7
35.5

12.2
–4.4
34.9

3.0
4.8
1.8

3.4
5.2
1.7

3.3
5.1
1.7

Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India4
Indonesia
Thailand
Vietnam

5.3
5.0
6.5
5.0
2.5
7.1

5.2
4.8
6.6
4.9
2.0
6.5

4.7
4.2
6.2
4.9
1.6
5.6

1.9
0.2
4.6
2.3
0.4
3.6

1.3
0.0
2.8
1.8
0.2
3.4

2.1
0.7
4.0
2.9
0.7
3.2

1.6
2.3
–0.6
–0.6
2.5
6.6

2.2
3.3
–1.0
–1.1
1.7
4.0

1.7
2.8
–1.4
–1.2
1.3
2.4

...
5.1
4.9
4.9
1.0
2.2

...
5.1
4.9
5.0
1.0
2.3

...
5.1
4.9
5.0
1.0
2.5

Malaysia
Philippines

5.1
5.7

4.5
5.4

4.0
5.7

1.8
3.2

1.6
1.6

2.2
2.6

1.4
–4.0

1.5
–3.8

1.8
–3.5

3.2
3.8

3.0
3.9

3.0
3.9

Other Emerging and Developing Asia5

3.9

3.3

4.4

9.3

9.6

8.9

–0.2

0.1

–1.0

...

...

...

Memorandum
ASEAN-56
Emerging Asia7

4.6
5.4

4.2
5.2

4.1
4.7

2.0
1.6

1.4
1.0

2.3
1.8

2.6
1.6

2.3
2.2

2.2
1.7

...
...

...
...

...
...

Asia

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.

3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.

4 See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

5 Other Emerging and Developing Asia comprises Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Fiji, Kiribati, Lao P.D.R., Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Micronesia,
Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu.
6 Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.
7 Emerging Asia comprises China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

43

2026

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Annex Table 1.1.3. Western Hemisphere Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Real GDP

Consumer Prices1

Projections

Current Account Balance2

Projections

Unemployment3

Projections

Projections

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

North America
United States
Mexico
Canada
Puerto Rico4

2.6
2.8
1.4
1.6
3.2

1.8
2.0
1.0
1.2
–0.8

2.0
2.1
1.5
1.5
–0.1

3.1
3.0
4.7
2.4
2.0

2.8
2.7
3.9
2.0
1.4

2.5
2.4
3.3
2.0
2.2

–3.6
–4.0
–0.9
–0.5
...

–3.6
–4.0
–0.2
–1.4
...

–3.3
–3.6
–0.3
–1.3
...

...
4.0
2.7
6.4
5.6

...
4.2
2.9
6.9
6.4

...
4.1
3.1
6.6
6.0

South America5
Brazil
Argentina
Colombia
Chile
Peru

2.3
3.4
–1.3
1.6
2.6
3.3

2.7
2.4
4.5
2.5
2.5
2.9

2.2
1.9
4.0
2.3
2.0
2.7

23.6
4.4
219.9
6.6
3.9
2.4

9.8
5.2
41.3
4.9
4.3
1.7

5.8
4.0
16.4
3.5
3.1
1.9

–1.1
–2.7
0.9
–1.7
–1.5
2.2

–1.6
–2.5
–1.2
–2.3
–2.5
1.8

–1.5
–2.3
–0.4
–2.6
–2.2
1.2

...
6.9
7.2
10.1
8.5
6.4

...
7.1
7.5
10.0
8.6
6.5

...
7.3
6.6
9.8
8.3
6.5

Ecuador
Venezuela
Bolivia
Paraguay
Uruguay

–2.0
5.3
0.7
4.2
3.1

3.2
0.5
0.6
4.4
2.5

2.0
–3.0
...
3.7
2.4

1.5
49.0
5.1
3.8
4.8

1.1
269.9
20.8
3.9
4.7

2.8
682.1
...
3.7
4.5

5.7
4.9
–3.0
–3.9
–1.0

4.9
4.2
–3.4
–3.5
–1.4

3.4
2.5
...
–3.7
–1.5

3.4
...
5.0
5.8
8.2

4.0
...
5.1
5.2
7.9

3.8
...
...
5.2
8.0

Central America6

3.9

3.4

3.8

2.3

1.9

3.0

–0.4

–0.1

–1.0

...

...

...

Caribbean7

12.1

3.6

8.2

6.2

6.1

6.4

2.6

–0.2

–0.6

...

...

...

Memorandum
Latin America and the Caribbean8
Eastern Caribbean Currency Union9

2.4
4.0

2.4
3.0

2.3
2.6

16.6
2.2

7.6
1.8

5.0
1.9

–0.9
–9.9

–1.1
–10.4

–1.1
–9.0

...
...

...
...

...
...

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix. Aggregates exclude
Venezuela.
2 Percent of GDP.
3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4 Puerto Rico is a territory of the United States, but its statistical data are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
5 See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
6 Central America refers to CAPDR (Central America, Panama, and the Dominican Republic) and comprises Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Nicaragua, and Panama.
7 The Caribbean comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and
the Grenadines, Suriname, and Trinidad and Tobago.
8 Latin America and the Caribbean comprises Mexico and economies from the Caribbean, Central America, and South America. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and
Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
9 Eastern Caribbean Currency Union comprises Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the Grenadines, as well as Anguilla and
Montserrat, which are not IMF members.

44

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.4. Middle East and Central Asia Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and
Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Real GDP

Consumer Prices1

Projections

Current Account Balance2

Projections

Unemployment3

Projections

Projections

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2.6

3.5

3.8

14.0

10.9

9.5

2.3

1.1

0.6

...

...

...

Oil Exporters4
Saudi Arabia
Iran
United Arab Emirates
Kazakhstan
Algeria

2.7
2.0
3.7
4.0
4.8
3.7

3.2
4.0
0.6
4.8
5.9
3.4

3.5
4.0
1.1
5.0
4.8
2.9

8.5
1.7
32.5
1.7
8.7
4.0

10.0
2.1
42.4
1.6
11.4
3.5

10.0
2.0
41.6
2.0
11.2
3.9

4.5
–0.5
3.2
14.5
–1.7
–1.1

2.8
–2.1
1.8
13.2
–3.8
–3.7

2.2
–2.5
2.0
12.3
–4.0
–3.8

...
3.5
7.6
...
4.7
...

...
...
9.2
...
4.6
...

...
...
9.2
...
4.6
...

Iraq
Qatar
Kuwait
Azerbaijan
Oman

–0.2
2.4
–2.6
4.1
1.7

0.5
2.9
2.6
3.0
2.9

3.6
6.1
3.9
2.5
4.0

2.6
1.2
2.9
2.2
0.6

1.5
0.1
2.2
5.7
0.9

2.5
2.6
2.2
4.5
1.5

–0.2
17.4
29.1
6.3
2.9

0.4
10.8
26.5
4.3
–1.0

–1.1
10.2
24.4
2.3
–0.7

...
...
...
5.4
...

...
...
...
5.3
...

...
...
...
5.3
...

Turkmenistan
Bahrain

3.0
2.6

2.3
2.9

2.3
3.3

4.6
0.9

3.9
0.3

5.0
0.8

4.4
4.8

2.3
3.5

0.7
3.8

...
6.2

...
...

...
...

Oil Importers5,6
Egypt
Pakistan7
Morocco
Uzbekistan
Tunisia

2.4
2.4
2.5
3.8
6.5
1.6

4.0
4.3
2.7
4.4
6.8
2.5

4.4
4.5
3.6
4.2
6.0
2.1

23.6
33.3
23.4
0.9
9.6
7.0

12.2
20.4
4.5
1.2
9.1
5.9

8.8
11.8
6.0
1.8
7.3
6.1

–3.9
–5.4
–0.6
–1.2
–5.0
–1.7

–3.2
–5.1
0.5
–2.3
–2.4
–3.1

–3.7
–4.3
–0.4
–2.6
–4.6
–3.3

...
7.4
8.3
13.3
5.5
...

...
7.4
8.0
13.1
5.0
...

...
7.3
7.5
12.7
4.5
...

Sudan7
Jordan
Georgia
Armenia
Tajikistan

–23.4
2.5
9.4
5.9
8.4

3.2
2.7
7.2
4.8
7.5

9.5
2.9
5.3
4.9
5.5

185.7
1.6
1.1
0.4
3.5

87.2
2.2
3.9
3.3
3.8

54.6
2.6
3.4
2.8
4.5

–3.3
–5.9
–4.4
–4.6
6.2

–3.1
–5.5
–4.5
–4.7
3.4

–7.7
–5.9
–4.6
–4.7
–0.4

60.8
...
13.9
13.9
...

60.6
...
13.9
13.5
...

58.0
...
13.9
13.3
...

Kyrgyz Republic
Mauritania
West Bank and Gaza7

9.0
6.3
–26.6

8.0
4.0
...

5.3
4.3
...

5.0
2.5
53.7

8.0
2.5
...

6.9
3.5
...

–25.3
–9.4
–21.1

–8.4
–7.2
...

–7.7
–7.1
...

4.0
...
...

4.0
...
...

4.0
...
...

5.5
2.1

5.6
3.2

4.7
3.7

6.7
15.2

8.6
11.2

8.0
9.8

–1.4
2.9

–2.0
1.6

–3.0
1.2

...
...

...
...

...
...

2.1
1.0

3.3
2.5

3.7
3.9

14.2
3.1

12.2
3.2

10.3
2.2

3.2
2.8

1.7
2.8

1.3
3.0

...
3.0

...
2.9

...
3.2

Middle East and Central Asia

Memorandum
Caucasus and Central Asia
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan,
and Pakistan6
Middle East and North Africa
Israel8
Source: IMF staff estimates.

Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.

3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.

4 Includes Libya and Yemen. Yemen does not currently export oil due to the internal conflict.

5 Includes Djibouti, Lebanon, and Somalia. See the country-specific note for Lebanon in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

6 Excludes Afghanistan and Syria because of the uncertain political situation. See the country-specific notes in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
7 See the country-specific notes for Pakistan, Sudan and West Bank and Gaza in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

8 Israel, which is not a member of the economic region, is shown for reasons of geography but is not included in the regional aggregates.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

45

2026

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Annex Table 1.1.5. Sub-Saharan African Economies: Real GDP, Consumer Prices, Current Account Balance, and Unemployment
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Real GDP

Consumer Prices1

Projections

Current Account Balance2

Projections

Unemployment3

Projections

Projections

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

2024

2025

2026

Sub-Saharan Africa

4.1

4.1

4.4

20.3

13.1

10.9

–1.5

–1.7

–1.8

...

...

...

Oil Exporters4
Nigeria5
Angola
Gabon
Chad
Equatorial Guinea

3.9
4.1
4.4
3.4
3.5
0.9

3.6
3.9
2.1
1.9
3.3
–1.6

3.9
4.2
2.1
2.6
3.6
0.5

29.1
31.4
28.2
1.2
5.1
3.4

21.7
23.0
21.6
1.4
4.0
2.9

19.8
22.0
16.3
2.5
3.6
2.9

5.3
6.8
5.4
4.0
1.0
–3.3

3.3
5.7
0.9
1.8
–2.3
–3.0

1.9
3.6
0.5
–0.3
–2.9
–3.8

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

Middle-Income Countries6
South Africa
Kenya
Ghana
Côte d’Ivoire
Cameroon
Senegal
Zambia

3.1
0.5
4.7
5.7
6.0
3.5
6.4
4.0

3.3
1.1
4.8
4.0
6.4
3.8
6.0
5.8

3.5
1.2
4.9
4.8
6.4
4.1
3.0
6.4

6.3
4.4
4.5
22.9
3.4
4.5
0.8
15.0

5.0
3.4
4.0
16.6
1.0
3.7
2.0
14.2

4.5
3.7
5.2
9.9
1.5
3.3
2.0
9.2

–2.2
–0.7
–2.3
1.1
–4.2
–3.1
–12.5
–2.6

–1.9
–0.9
–2.8
1.8
–2.1
–3.4
–8.0
1.3

–1.9
–1.2
–3.4
1.7
–1.7
–3.9
–5.4
2.7

...
32.6
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
32.7
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
32.7
...
...
...
...
...
...

Low-Income Countries7
Ethiopia
Tanzania
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Uganda
Mali
Burkina Faso

6.0
8.1
5.5
6.5
6.3
4.7
4.8

5.9
7.2
6.0
5.3
6.4
5.0
4.0

6.2
7.1
6.3
5.3
7.6
5.4
4.8

28.1
21.0
3.1
17.7
3.3
3.2
4.2

12.1
13.0
3.3
8.8
3.8
3.5
1.3

7.2
9.4
3.5
7.1
4.3
2.0
2.4

–5.3
–4.2
–2.6
–3.9
–7.5
–4.6
–5.7

–5.3
–2.9
–2.6
–3.3
–5.0
–4.6
–1.6

–4.4
–2.6
–2.7
–2.1
–3.7
–2.6
–1.3

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...
...

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages. Year-end to year-end changes can be found in Tables A6 and A7 in the Statistical Appendix.
2 Percent of GDP.

3 Percent. National definitions of unemployment may differ.
4 Includes Republic of Congo and South Sudan.

5 See the country-specific note for Nigeria in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

6 Includes Benin, Botswana, Cabo Verde, the Comoros, Eswatini, Lesotho, Mauritius, Namibia, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Seychelles.

7 Includes Burundi, Central African Republic, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Togo, and
Zimbabwe.

46

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

CHAPTER 1

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Annex Table 1.1.6. Summary of World Real per Capita Output

(Annual percent change; in constant 2017 international dollars at purchasing power parity)
Average

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2.0

2.5

2.5

1.8

–3.9

5.7

2.8

2.4

2.3

2.7

2.2

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies2

0.8
0.7
0.4
1.2
0.3
–0.9
0.0
0.5
0.4
0.4
1.9

2.2
1.8
2.5
2.6
2.0
1.8
2.6
1.8
2.0
1.8
2.5

1.9
2.4
1.6
1.0
1.3
1.0
1.8
0.8
0.8
1.3
2.1

1.5
2.1
1.4
0.9
1.7
0.6
1.1
–0.2
1.1
0.4
1.3

–4.4
–2.9
–6.3
–4.0
–7.9
–8.6
–11.1
–3.9
–10.7
–6.1
–2.1

5.9
5.8
6.5
4.1
6.4
9.7
6.5
3.0
8.7
5.3
5.9

2.4
2.0
3.3
1.1
2.3
5.2
5.0
1.3
4.0
2.5
1.9

0.9
2.1
–0.1
–1.8
1.3
0.8
1.3
1.7
–0.6
–1.3
0.6

1.2
1.9
0.6
–0.8
0.8
0.8
2.5
0.6
–0.3
–1.3
1.7

1.2
1.5
0.8
0.0
0.4
0.6
1.6
1.6
0.4
0.1
1.3

1.4
1.8
0.9
0.8
0.6
0.9
0.8
1.2
0.5
1.6
1.5

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India3
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa

3.6
6.5
8.4
5.3
2.1
1.5
1.2
1.2
0.2
1.5
0.4
1.8
2.7
0.6

3.2
5.6
6.3
5.6
3.7
1.6
0.3
0.7
0.9
0.0
1.1
0.0
–1.6
–0.3

3.3
5.6
6.4
5.3
3.5
2.7
0.2
1.1
1.0
0.7
5.9
0.5
–0.4
0.0

2.5
4.5
5.7
2.8
2.4
2.1
–0.9
0.6
–1.3
0.3
2.1
0.4
0.0
–1.3

–3.2
–1.4
2.2
–6.7
–1.9
–2.5
–8.0
–3.9
–9.1
–4.5
–8.3
–5.7
–8.3
–7.5

5.9
7.1
8.5
8.8
7.6
6.2
6.6
4.3
5.4
2.9
9.2
1.2
–1.0
3.8

3.2
4.1
3.2
6.8
1.9
–1.1
3.6
2.6
2.9
4.1
7.2
1.9
2.2
0.9

3.6
5.5
5.5
8.2
3.8
4.4
1.6
2.8
2.4
0.4
–4.0
1.2
1.2
–0.5

3.2
4.7
5.1
5.6
3.8
4.5
1.6
3.0
0.6
0.5
–2.6
1.5
1.9
–0.8

3.7
4.7
5.0
5.7
2.1
1.0
1.7
2.0
0.2
6.0
2.0
1.6
1.8
–0.3

3.0
4.2
4.4
5.2
2.2
1.3
1.6
1.6
0.8
2.0
1.9
1.8
2.1
–0.3

Memorandum
European Union
ASEAN-54
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

0.7
3.6
1.2
3.9
2.8

2.9
4.0
–0.6
3.6
1.7

2.1
3.8
0.2
3.7
2.0

1.8
3.2
–0.1
2.7
2.3

–5.7
–5.5
–4.7
–2.9
–3.9

6.7
3.3
3.0
6.6
1.2

3.5
4.6
4.4
3.5
2.6

0.0
3.1
0.4
4.0
1.8

0.8
3.6
–0.1
3.6
1.7

1.2
3.2
1.4
3.5
3.9

1.3
3.2
1.9
3.3
2.7

World

Source: IMF staff estimates.
Note: Data for some countries are based on fiscal years. Please refer to Table F in the Statistical Appendix for a list of economies with exceptional reporting periods.
1 Data are calculated as the sum of individual euro area countries.

2 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
3 See the country-specific note for India in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4 ASEAN-5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

47

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

References
Acalin, Julien, Virginia Alonso, Clara Arroyo, W. Raphael Lam,
Leonardo Martinez, Anh Dinh Minh Nguyen, Francisco
Roch, Galen Sher, and Alexandra Solovyeva. Forthcoming.
“Fiscal Guardrails against High Debt and Looming Spending
Pressures.” IMF Staff Discussion Note, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ahir, Hites, Nicholas Bloom, and Davide Furceri. 2022. “The
World Uncertainty Index.” NBER Working Paper 29763,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Andrle, Michal, and Benjamin L. Hunt. 2020. “Model-Based
Globally-Consistent Risk Assessment.” IMF Working Paper
20/064, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Aoki, Kosuke. 2001. “Optimal Monetary Policy Responses to
Relative-Price Changes.” Journal of Monetary Economics 48
(1): 55–80.
Bank of England (BOE). 2019. Monetary Policy Report,
Section 4. London.
Bansal, Ravi and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the Long Run:
A Potential Resolution of Asset Pricing Puzzles.” Journal of
Finance 59(4): 1481–1509.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2019. “The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks: Beyond Hulten’s
Theorem.” Econometrica 87 (4): 1155–203.
Bauer, R. Andrew, Renee Haltom, and Matthew Martin. 2025.
“Why Businesses Say Tariffs Have a Delayed Effect on
Inflation.” Regional Matters (blog), Federal Reserve Bank of
Richmond, August 8.
Bernanke, Ben. 1983. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical
Investment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (1): 85-106.
Bernanke, Ben. 2024. “Forecasting for Monetary Policy Making
and Communication at the Bank of England: A Review.”
Bank of England, London.
Bigio, Saki, and Jennifer La’O. 2020. “Distortions in Production Networks.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (4):
2187–253.
Binder, Carola Conces. 2021. “Political Pressure on Central
Banks.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 53 (4): 715–44.
Boz, Emine, Camila Casas, Federico Diez, Gita Gopinath,
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mikkel Plagborg-Moller.
2020. “Dominant Currency Paradigm.” American Economic
Review 110 (3): 677–719.
Caldara, Dario, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea
Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo. 2020. “The Economic Effects
of Trade Policy Uncertainty.” Journal of Monetary Economics
109: 38–59.
Cavallo, Alberto, Paola Llamas, and Franco Vazquez. 2025.
“Tracking the Short-Run Price Impact of U.S. Tariffs.” Harvard Business School Working Paper, Cambridge, MA.
Cerutti, Eugenio M., Antonio Garcia Pascual, Yosuke Kido,
Longji Li, Giovanni Melina, Marina Mendes Tavares, and
Philippe Wingender. 2025. “The Global Impact of AI: Mind
the Gap.” IMF Working Paper 25/76, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.

48

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Chabert, Guillaume, and Robert Powell. 2025. “Poorest Countries and Fragile States Are Increasingly Falling Behind.” IMF
Blog, June 26.
Choi, Sangyup, Davide Furceri, Prakash Loungani, Saurabh
Mishra, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro. 2018. “Oil Prices and
Inflation Dynamics: Evidence from Advanced and Developing Economies.” Journal of International Money and Finance
82 (April): 71–96.
Davis, Steven J. 2016. “An Index of Global Economic Policy
Uncertainty.” NBER Working Paper 22740, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Di Pace, Federico, Luciana Juvenal, and Ivan Petrella. 2025.
“Terms-of-Trade Shocks Are Not All Alike.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 17 (2): 24–64.
Domar, Evsey D. 1961. “On the Measurement of Technological
Change.” Economic Journal 71 (284): 709–29.
Drechsel, Thomas. 2025. “Political Pressure on the Fed.” University of Maryland, College Park, MD.
Drechsel, Thomas, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2018. “Commodity
Booms and Busts in Emerging Economies.” Journal of International Economics 112: 200–18.
Duzhak, Evgeniya, and Addie New-Schmidt. 2025. “Updated
Estimates of Net International Migration.” SF Fed Blog, July 17.
Edelberg, Wendy, Stan Veuger, and Tara Watson. 2025. “Immigration Policy and Its Macroeconomic Effects in the Second
Trump Administration.” AEI Economic Perspectives, July 2.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Pinelopi Goldberg, Patrick Kennedy, Amit
Khandelwal, and Daria Taglioni. 2024. “The US China Trade
War and Global Reallocations.” American Economic Review:
Insights 6 (2): 295–312.
Francois, John Nana, Nazneen Ahmad, Andrew Keinsley, and
Akwasi Nti-Addae. 2022. “Heterogeneity in the Long-Run
Remittance-Output Relationship: Theory and New Evidence.” Economic Modelling 110: 105793.
Freund, Caroline, Aaditya Mattoo, Alen Mulabdic, and Michele
Ruta. 2024. “Is US Trade Policy Reshaping Global Supply
Chains?” Journal of International Economics, 152: 104007.
Furceri, Davide, Carlos Goncalves, and Hongchi Li. 2025. “The
Impact of Debt and Deficits on Long-Term Interest Rates in
the US.” IMF Working Paper 25/142, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ghironi, Fabio, and Galip Kemal Ozhan. Forthcoming. “Interest
Rate Uncertainty as a Policy Tool?” Journal of International
Economics.
Gomez-Gonzalez, Patricia, Maximiliano Jerez-Osses, Vida
Maver, Jorge Miranda-Pinto, and Jean-Marc Natal. 2025.
“Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations: Does Size
Matter?” IMF Working Paper 25/208, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Gopinath, Gita. 2023. “Harnessing AI for Global Good.”
Finance & Development 60(4).
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Andrea F. Presbitero,
and Petia Topalova. 2025. “Changing Global Linkages: A
New Cold War?” Journal of International Economics 153(C).

CHAPTER 1

Graziano, Alejandro G., Monika Sztajerowska, and Christian
Volpe Martincus. 2024. “Trading Places: How Trade Policy Is
Reshaping Multinational Firms’ Location.” CESifo Working
Paper Series.
Huckstep, Sam, Laura Granito, Sara Casadevall Bellés, and Lee
Crawfurd. 2025. “Charting the Fallout of Aid Cuts: Which
Countries Will Be Hit Hardest, as Multiple Donors Cut
Budgets?” Center for Global Development, June 12.
Hyun, Daniel, and Jacky Lee. 2023. “Variations in Pass-Through
from Global Agricultural Commodity Prices to Domestic
Food Inflation.” Bank of Canada Staff Discussion Paper
2023-24, Ottawa.
International Labour Organization (ILO). 2025. “Global
Estimates on International Migrants in the Labour Force.”
Geneva.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2025a. “Debt
Vulnerabilities and Financing Challenges in Emerging
Markets and Developing Economies—An Overview
of Key Data.” IMF Policy Paper 25/002, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://doi.
org/10.5089/9798229002264.007.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2025b. “The 4th
Financing for Development Conference—Contribution of
the IMF to the International Financing for Development
Agenda.” IMF Policy Paper 25/022, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://doi.
org/10.5089/9798229013208.007.
Jeanne, Olivier, and Jeongwon Son. 2024. “To What Extent Are
Tariffs Offset by Exchange Rates?” Journal of International
Money and Finance 142: 103015.
Jordà, Oscar. 2005. “Estimation and Inference of Impulse
Responses by Local Projections.” American Economic Review
95 (1): 161–82.
Kohn, David, Fernando Leibovici, and Hakon Tretvoll. 2021.
“Trade in Commodities and Business Cycle Volatility.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 13 (3): 173–208.
Leeper, Eric Michael. 2023. “Fiscal Dominance: How Worried
Should We Be?” Mercatus Policy Brief Series. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.4665190.
Londono, Juan M., Sai Ma, and Beth Anne Wilson. 2025.
“Costs of Rising Uncertainty.” FEDS Notes, April 24. https://
doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.3779.
Mayda, Anna Maria, and Giovanni Peri. 2025. “Immigration
and Border Policies.” In The Economic Consequences of the
Second Trump Administration: A Preliminary Assessment, edited
by Gary Gensler, Simon Johnson, Ugo Panizza, and Beatrice

GLOBAL PROSPECTS AND POLICIES

Weder di Mauro, Chapter 6. Paris: Centre for Economic
Policy Research.
Miranda-Pinto, Jorge, Andrea Pescatori, Martin Stuermer, and
Xueliang Wang. 2024. “Beyond Energy: The Inflationary
Effects of Metal Price Shocks in Production Networks.”
IMF Working Paper 24/215, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Müller, Karsten, Chenzi Xu, Mohamed Lehbib, and Ziliang Chen,
2025. “The Global Macro Database: A New International
Macroeconomic Dataset.” NBER Working Paper 33714,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Mundell, Robert Alexander, 1960. “The Pure Theory of International Trade.” American Economic Review 50 (1): 67–110.
Nikolova, Milena, and Carol Graham. 2014. “Employment, LateLife Work, Retirement, and Well-Being in Europe and the
United States.” IZA Journal of European Labor Studies 3 (1): 5.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2025. “Cuts in Official Development Assistance:
OECD Projections for 2025 and the Near Term.” OECD
Policy Briefs, Paris. https://doi.org/10.1787/8c530629-en.
Pastén, Ernesto, and Ricardo Reis. 2021. “Independence,
Credibility, and Communication of Central Banking.” Banco
Central de Chile, Santiago.
Qiu, Zhesheng, Yicheng Wang, Le Xu, and Francesco Zanetti.
2025. “Monetary Policy in Open Economies with Production
Networks.” CESifo Working Paper, Munich.
Romero, Damian. 2025. “Domestic Linkages and the Transmission of Commodity Price Shocks.” Journal of International
Economics 153: 104041.
Rotunno, Lorenzo, and Michele Ruta. 2025. “Trade Partners’
Responses to US Tariffs.” IMF Working Paper 25/147, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Rubbo, Elisa. 2023. “Networks, Phillips Curves, and Monetary
Policy.” Econometrica 91 (4): 1417–55.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martín Uribe. 2018. “How
Important Are Terms-of-Trade Shocks?” International Economic Review 59 (1): 85–111.
Silva, Alvaro. 2024. “Inflation in Disaggregated Small Open
Economies.” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research
Department Working Paper 24-12, Boston, MA.
Silva, Alvaro, Petre Caraiani, Jorge Miranda-Pinto, and Juan
Olaya-Agudelo. 2024. “Commodity Prices and Production
Networks in Small Open Economies.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 168: 104968.
Woodford, Michael. 2003. “Optimal Interest-Rate Smoothing.”
Review of Economic Studies 70 (4): 861–86.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

49

CHAPTER

2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR
GOOD POLICIES?

Emerging markets have shown remarkable resilience to
risk-off shocks in recent years. While favorable external
conditions—good luck—contributed to this resilience,
improvements in policy frameworks—good policies—
played a critical role in bolstering the capacity of emerging
markets to withstand risk-off shocks. Evidence suggests
that monetary policy implementation and credibility
have improved, with central banks becoming less sensitive
to fiscal pressures and relying less on foreign exchange
interventions. Central banks also hold sway over domestic borrowing conditions, although spillovers from US
monetary policy remain influential. On the fiscal side,
countercyclicality and responsiveness to sustainability
concerns have increased, though borrowing costs remain
elevated in high-debt environments. Looking ahead,
emerging markets with strong frameworks are better positioned to navigate risk-off shocks because they benefit from
easier policy trade-offs and face a lower risk and severity
of capital flow reversals. In contrast, countries with weak
frameworks should avoid delaying monetary tightening when sustained price pressures emerge, as doing so
typically results in de-anchoring of inflation expectations
and larger output losses. Foreign exchange interventions
provide temporary relief, but they are costly. Strong policy
frameworks lessen both reliance on—and the need for—
such measures. Given uneven cross-country progress and
the erosion of fiscal buffers in some cases, continued efforts
to strengthen policy frameworks, safeguard central bank
independence, and rebuild fiscal space remain essential,
as the external environment could deteriorate rapidly.

Introduction
Emerging markets have historically been vulnerable
to global financial shocks, often experiencing significant economic and financial instability during periods
of heightened risk aversion—commonly referred to
The authors of this chapter are Marijn A. Bolhuis, Francesco
Grigoli (co-lead), Andrea Presbitero (co-lead), and Zhao Zhang,
with contributions from Thomas J. Carter, Marcin Kolasa, Jesper
Linde, Giulio Lisi, Rui Mano, Roland Meeks, and Hedda Thorell.
Pedro Henrique de Barros Gagliardi and Weili Lin provided research
assistance. The chapter benefited from comments by Anusha Chari,
Enrique Mendoza, and internal seminar participants and reviewers.

as “risk-off ” episodes (Caballero and Kamber 2019;
Miranda-Agrippino and Rey 2020a). These shifts in
the risk appetite of global investors have typically
triggered capital outflows, leading to currency depreciations that tightened financial conditions, owing to
currency mismatches and increased borrowing costs
(Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad 2020; Goldberg
and Krogstrup 2023). As a result, risk-off shocks have
been akin to supply shocks because they ultimately
cause output losses and inflation surges, complicating
policy trade-offs. These dynamics have defined the
dilemma faced by emerging markets, which generally
could not react to a shock leading to a capital outflow
that depreciates the currency with monetary policy easing, because of price and financial stability concerns.
Instead, policymakers often needed to tighten policies,
exacerbating output losses and preventing currencies
from depreciating, thereby fueling “fear of floating”
(Ghosh, Ostry, and Qureshi 2017).
Recent experience marks a departure from this historical pattern, with many emerging markets displaying
remarkable resilience—both in terms of financial and
economic conditions—to external shocks (Hardy, Igan,
and Kharroubi 2024).1 Two hypotheses have emerged
to explain this improved performance. One is simply
that emerging markets got lucky: Steady growth in
advanced economies, favorable terms of trade, and
easier financial conditions after the global financial
crisis helped mitigate external pressures (Figure 2.1,
panel 1).2 Emerging markets also benefited from spillovers from China’s sustained growth and its increasing integration in the global economy (Chapter 4 of
the April 2024 World Economic Outlook). Moreover,
despite rapid and sizable monetary tightening by major
1For a more general assessment of emerging markets’ performance
in sustaining expansions and recovering from downturns, see Kose
and Prasad 2010; Cerra, Panizza, and Saxena 2013; Abiad and others
2015; and Aizenman and others 2024, among others. Compared
with this literature, the chapter focuses on emerging markets’ performance in response to risk-off shocks.
2This chapter uses a sample of 26 emerging markets—covering
about 88 percent of GDP of emerging markets and middle-income
economies—and 30 advanced economies (see Online Annex 2.1).
All online annexes are available at www.imf.org/en/Publications/
WEO.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

51

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 2.1. Changes in External Conditions and Policy
Frameworks
1.2 1. External Conditions during Risk-Off Episodes
(Percent)
Pre-GFC
0.8

2.4
Post-GFC

1.6

0.4

0.8

0

0

−0.4

−0.8

−0.8

AEs’ real GDP growth
(percent)

20 2. Policy Frameworks

Commodity terms of trade
(percent, right scale)
Pre-GFC

US financial conditions
(standard deviations)
Post-GFC

1.8
1.5

16

1.2

12

0.9

8

0.6

4
0

−1.6

0.3
EMs with inflation
targeting
(average number of
countries)

FX-related
macroprudential regulation
(average of cumulative
net tightening actions, right scale)

EMs with fiscal rules
(average number of
countries)

0

Sources: Cobham 2025; Federal Reserve Board; IMF, Fiscal Rules Dataset; Gruss and
Kebhaj 2019; Haver Analytics; IMF, Integrated Macroprudential Policy Database; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: Risk-off episodes are identified using an extended version of the RORO Index
of Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad (2023)—see Online Annex 2.2 for details. The
FX-related macroprudential regulation metric is calculated as the cross-country average
of the cumulative net tightening actions related to capital requirements for banks;
limits on foreign currency lending and rules or recommendations on foreign currency
loans; and limits on net or gross open FX positions, FX exposures and funding, and
currency mismatch regulations. Countries are classified as inflation targeting regimes
according to Cobham (2025). External conditions are calculated as the weighted change
in real GDP for AEs, the commodity price–based terms of trade index for EMs, and the
average of the US FCI-G index, measured six months following the start of a risk-off
episode. The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC period is 2010–24. AEs =
advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; FCI-G index = Financial Conditions
Impulse on Growth index; FX = foreign exchange; GFC = global financial crisis; RORO
Index = Risk-On Risk-Off Index.

central banks, the postpandemic global financial environment remained broadly accommodative, allowing
many emerging market sovereign and corporate bond
issuers to obtain long-term financing at historically
low rates (Chapter 1 of the April 2025 Global Financial Stability Report).3 Finally, the relatively strong
US recovery after the pandemic and the soft landing
3By contrast, prior to the global financial crisis, emerging markets
were more vulnerable to currency, banking, and sovereign default
crises (Gourinchas and Obstfeld 2012).

52

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

following the Federal Reserve’s tightening cycle likely
further dampened spillovers to emerging markets
(Chen and Tillmann 2025).
Another, yet complementary, explanation is the
“good policies” argument. This attributes resilience
to adverse shifts in investor sentiment to changes in
emerging markets’ monetary, macroprudential, and
fiscal frameworks (Figure 2.1, panel 2). While different frameworks and exchange rate regimes may be
appropriate according to country circumstances, the
adoption of inflation targeting and greater exchange
rate flexibility has enhanced emerging markets’ capacity to absorb external shocks (Obstfeld, Ostry, and
Qureshi 2019) and stabilize macroeconomic conditions. As monetary policy frameworks matured, longterm inflation expectations became better anchored,
reducing the pass-through of currency depreciation
to domestic prices and the persistence of inflation
(Campa and Goldberg 2005; Bems and others 2021;
Carrière-Swallow and others 2021). Meanwhile, tighter
macroprudential policies contributed to reducing foreign exchange mismatches, allowing countries to move
away from “original sin” (currency mismatch) and
facilitating more countercyclical monetary responses
to external shocks (Bergant and others 2024).4 And
enhanced fiscal credibility—through, for example,
the implementation of fiscal rules—lessened fiscal
dominance concerns and supported a trend toward
de-dollarization of debt, containing sovereign risk premiums (Gomez-Gonzalez, Valencia, and Sánchez 2022;
Apeti and others 2024). Stronger policy frameworks
enabled better policies while also providing access
to IMF precautionary instruments, which helped
countries navigate recent shocks by containing capital
outflows and limiting the rise in borrowing costs
(Box 2.1).5
4Improvements in governance and institutional capacity, particularly in debt management, have also contributed to greater resilience,
supporting domestic borrowing at longer maturities and fostering
the development of deeper local currency bond markets. An increase
in the share of local currency debt and in domestic investors’
participation in emerging markets with strong policy frameworks
have reduced the risks stemming from both “original sin” (currency
mismatch) and “original sin redux” (nonresident outflows)—see
Chapter 3 of the April 2025 Global Financial Stability Report. Similarly, evidence suggests that advances in foreign exchange hedging
instruments in some emerging markets have improved the currency
composition of sovereign balance sheets (Alfaro, Calani, and Varela
2021) and enhanced monetary policy transmission (Erel and others
2023; Liang, Sampaio, and Sarkisyan 2024).
5Das, Gopinath, and Kalemli-Özcan (2022) show that preemptive
capital flow measures can also lower external finance premiums in
the aftermath of risk-off shocks, enabling countries’ continued access
to international capital markets during troubled times.

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

The severity of the COVID-19 shock and the
postpandemic inflation surge put policy frameworks to
the test. Many central banks in emerging markets—
especially those with stronger policy frameworks—
responded to postpandemic inflation with swifter and
more forceful monetary tightening than in previous
cycles and, in many cases, earlier than their advanced
economy counterparts, pointing to increased monetary
policy autonomy. In some cases, unconventional monetary policy tools were also deployed (Acosta-Henao
and others 2024; Chapter 4 of the April 2021 World
Economic Outlook) without causing notable movements
in exchange rates and capital flows. While concerns
about capital outflows and currency stability remained
relevant, policy decisions were more clearly driven by
domestic inflation considerations than in the past,
when tightening was often motivated by the need to
defend exchange rates.6 In some cases, foreign exchange
reserves were also deployed to counter excessive currency pressures, yet reserve buffers have remained at
historically robust levels (Adrian, Natalucci, and Wu
2024). The picture is more nuanced, however, when it
comes to fiscal policies. The fiscal stance in emerging
markets—measured as the primary-balance-to-GDP
ratio—has been relatively restrained, marking a notable
shift from past crises, when consolidation was often
delayed. However, the presence of fiscal rules did not
guarantee improvements in policy implementation—as
unwarranted deviations from fiscal rules are common
(Alonso and others, forthcoming)—leading to the
buildup of debt vulnerabilities, especially in Latin
America (see the October 2024 Regional Economic Outlook for the Western Hemisphere). Similarly, although
domestic investors have increased their participation in
local currency debt markets, financial stability risks are
still salient, especially in countries with weaker policy
frameworks (Chapter 3 of the October 2025 Global
Financial Stability Report).
This chapter takes stock of emerging market performance in output and inflation stabilization during
risk-off episodes over almost three decades. It examines the evolution of monetary, macroprudential, and
fiscal policy frameworks along different dimensions,
and it quantifies the gains from improved policy
trade-offs. The analysis seeks to determine the extent
to which emerging market resilience is structural and
sustainable—rooted in enhanced policy frameworks—
or the result of favorable, yet changing, external
6Concerns about capital flight in the postpandemic period may
have been lessened by the synchronized nature of the inflation surge.

conditions. As emerging markets prepare for a potentially more challenging global financial landscape (see
Chapter 1), a clearer understanding of these underlying
drivers is crucial for designing future policy strategies
to mitigate risks.
To achieve these objectives, the chapter addresses the
following questions:
• How did emerging markets fare during risk-off
episodes? How have emerging markets performed
during risk-off shocks? Have they been more resilient during recent episodes, both according to real
and financial indicators, compared with earlier ones?
• How have policy frameworks evolved in emerging
markets? Has the conduct of monetary policy shifted
from a focus on exchange rates and inflation toward
addressing domestic demand shortfalls as a result of
better-anchored inflation expectations? Has monetary policy become more credible? Does monetary
policy steer domestic financial conditions or do these
remain driven largely by US monetary policy? Have
improved frameworks reduced the need for foreign
exchange interventions? Has fiscal policy become
more countercyclical? Have fiscal frameworks gained
credibility and strengthened debt sustainability?
• To what extent can recent emerging market resilience
be attributed to good luck (that is, benign external
conditions) instead of good policies? How large is the
contribution of improved policy frameworks to the
better output and inflation performance of these
economies during risk-off episodes? How does it
compare with the contribution of external factors?
• How should emerging markets deal with future risk-off
shocks? What gains in policy trade-offs do improved
policy frameworks accrue? What is the appropriate
mix and timing of policy responses for countries
with weaker policy frameworks during episodes of
global financial stress?
To answer these questions, the chapter first compiles stylized facts about the performance of emerging
markets during risk-off episodes and contrasts this performance before and after the global financial crisis.7
It then sheds light on the improvements in policy
7The choice of the global financial crisis as the date to split the
sample is driven by data considerations. Since for many countries in
the sample data coverage begins in the early 2000s, the global financial crisis allows for an equal number of risk-off episodes in the two
subperiods. However, this does not imply that the crisis represents
a structural break in emerging markets’ performance in response to
risk-off shocks. Rather, improvements in the policy framework are
understood to have evolved gradually over time.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

53

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

frameworks by moving beyond the de jure definition
and focusing on their implementation, credibility,
and outcomes. Finally, the chapter uses a quantitative
version of the IMF’s Integrated Policy Framework
(IPF) to show how these improvements are reflected
in better policy trade-offs and explores appropriate policy responses, depending on country-specific
characteristics.
The chapter’s main findings are as follows:
• Emerging markets have historically been vulnerable
to global risk-off events, but recent evidence points
to increased resilience. While the magnitude and
duration of risk-off shocks have not meaningfully
changed—nor have the underlying financial factors
leading to these shocks—most emerging markets
have displayed a remarkable degree of resilience to
these episodes since the global financial crisis, experiencing smaller output contractions and negligible
inflationary pressures.
• The implementation and credibility of monetary policy
have gradually improved over time, with emerging
markets equipped with strong policy frameworks relying
less on foreign exchange interventions. In general,
central banks in emerging markets have increasingly
focused on output stabilization rather than exchange
rate management, reflecting better-anchored inflation expectations. Financial markets’ expectations
also align more closely with actual policy decisions,
signaling improved credibility. At the same time,
emerging markets with better-anchored inflation
expectations intervene less in foreign exchange
markets in response to risk-off episodes, as the
exchange rate pass-through tends to be lower and
fear of floating is reduced. Similarly, more stringent macroprudential regulation limits the share of
foreign currency debt, mitigating financial stability
concerns and reducing the need for foreign exchange
interventions.8
• Central banks are less sensitive to fiscal pressures and
retain traction over domestic borrowing conditions.
Before the global financial crisis, higher government
spending often led to looser monetary policy and
rising inflation expectations, but postcrisis spending
shocks have been met with rate hikes, and longterm inflation expectations have remained anchored,
as central banks have become more independent. Domestic monetary policy shocks transmit
8Consistent with this development, the use of capital flow

management measures also declined. For a broader discussion, see
Bergant and others (forthcoming).

54

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

effectively to short-term yields; however, US
monetary policy still influences longer-term yields
and riskier asset classes.
• Emerging markets have made significant strides in
implementing more effective fiscal policies, but borrowing costs remain sensitive to high debt levels. Compared with the period before the global financial
crisis, stronger fiscal frameworks have allowed fiscal
policy to react more to slack—helping stabilize
output during global downturns—and to debt
sustainability pressures, improving countries’ ability
to stabilize debt, although sovereign spreads remain
sensitive to debt burdens.
• The resilience to risk-off shocks observed in recent years
not only reflects benign external conditions, but it is
also rooted in improved policy frameworks. Comparing typical risk-off episodes after the global financial crisis with those before, the analysis estimates
that improved policy frameworks accounted for
0.5 percentage point higher growth and 0.6 percentage point lower inflation. In contrast, favorable
external conditions supported faster growth, contributing another 0.5 percentage point, but did not ease
inflationary pressures.
• Dilemma or trilemma? Resilience to risk-off episodes,
the diminished need for foreign exchange interventions in the presence of strong policy frameworks,
and evidence of autonomy of domestic monetary
policy are suggestive of a progressive transition
toward a world that, while unequal across countries,
appears to be characterized by the trilemma of the
classic Mundell-Fleming framework and less by the
dilemma described in Rey (2015), in which monetary policy independence is limited unless capital
controls are used.
The chapter offers some policy recommendations to
deal with future risk-off shocks:
• Looking forward, efforts to strengthen policy frameworks should be sustained, as these enhance emerging
markets’ ability to withstand risk-off shocks by easing
policy trade-offs and reducing the likelihood of sudden
stops. Model simulations suggest that strong policy
frameworks reduce the extent of monetary policy
tightening required to contain inflation, allowing
a shift in focus toward output stabilization. In
response to a 10 percent nominal exchange rate
depreciation triggered by a risk-off shock, economies with strong policy frameworks—as in the
period after the global financial crisis—experience
85 percent smaller output contractions in the

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

following year than economies with weak policy
frameworks, as in the period before the crisis. In
addition, improved balance sheets cut in half the
risk of sudden stops—abrupt reversals of capital
inflows into an economy—and reduce their severity.
• Emerging markets with weak policy frameworks should
avoid delaying monetary tightening. Faced with
risk-off and persistent cost-push shocks—as in the
postpandemic environment—emerging markets with
weak frameworks that hesitate to tighten the monetary stance encounter steeper costs later. In response
to a 10 percent nominal exchange rate depreciation
and a 0.5 percentage point increase in inflation, policy rates need to rise by as much as 1.4 percentage
points more than in comparable emerging markets
that follow a standard Taylor rule to eventually
bring inflation back to target, resulting in output
contractions that are 0.7 percentage point larger five
quarters after the shocks.
• Foreign exchange interventions help contain inflation
and limit output losses associated with monetary tightening in countries with weak policy frameworks, but
they are needed less when policy frameworks are strong.
In emerging markets with weak frameworks, foreign
exchange interventions help contain the exchange
rate depreciation triggered by the risk-off shock and
reduce the need for rate hikes, ultimately lowering
output losses by 0.9 percentage point two years
after the shock compared with a no-intervention
scenario. However, the benefits of foreign exchange
interventions are marginal in countries with strong
frameworks, where inflation expectations are already
well anchored and the exchange rate supports net
exports. These results validate the notion that foreign exchange interventions are a useful policy tool,
but not a substitute for improved policy frameworks. In countries with strong policy frameworks,
foreign exchange interventions become less relevant,
repositioning policymakers in the trilemma, a world
where they can opt for a flexible exchange rate and
an independent monetary policy.
Despite significant progress, emerging markets’
resilience will continue to be tested. While policy
frameworks have strengthened, risks lie ahead: External
conditions can quickly deteriorate, fiscal space is limited by high debt following recent global shocks, and
policy backsliding undermines hard-won credibility.
As improvements have been uneven across countries,
maintaining and building on these gains will require
a steadfast commitment to improving frameworks,

including by safeguarding central bank independence
when inflation is low and fiscal pressures mount.

Emerging Market Resilience to Risk-Off
Episodes
The global search for yield can generate destabilizing outcomes in emerging markets when risk appetite
declines, leading to capital flight (Hofmann, Shim, and
Shin 2016; Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad 2021,
2022). The sophistication of international capital
markets results in a multitude of factors that can affect
risk appetite. The Risk-On Risk-Off (RORO) Index of
Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad (2023) is a multifaceted measure of these factors—encompassing equity
volatility risks, credit risks, liquidity risks, and currency
risks—that describes investors’ willingness to take on,
retain, or offload risky assets in advanced economies.
This chapter extends the original index starting in 1997 up to the end of 2024 and deploys an
algorithm-based approach to date risk-off episodes.9
The 16 risk-off episodes identified by the algorithm
are evenly split between the period before and after
the global financial crisis. They correspond to wellknown events, including the dot-com crash, the global
financial crisis, the European sovereign debt crisis, and
the COVID-19 pandemic (Figure 2.2, panel 1).10
On average, episodes before and after the global
financial crisis are broadly comparable. The average
risk-off episode registered an increase of about one
standard deviation and lasted about five months in
both periods (Figure 2.2, panel 2). The largest episodes
were the global financial crisis itself and the pandemic;
the longest were the subprime crisis starting in June
2007 and the global growth scare starting in May 2015
(both lasted 10 months). Moreover, an analysis of the
proportion of the RORO’s variation explained by each
9See Online Annex 2.2 for details about the algorithm used to
date the episodes. Applying the algorithm to other indices of shifts
in global risk aversion (for example, Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xu
2022) yields similar results.
10Similar to other risk-off episodes, the COVID-19 pandemic
was characterized by heightened volatility and a widespread sell-off
of risky assets. However, supply-side disruptions coupled with the
outsize policy response made the episode somewhat atypical. The
2013 taper tantrum is not identified as a risk-off episode because
financial variables in advanced economies that feed into the RORO
Index increased only modestly. In contrast with typical risk-off
episodes, US bond yields increased sharply, consistent with a shock
to US monetary policy rather than to an increase in risk aversion
in advanced economies (Harikrishnan, Silk, and Yoldas 2023).
However, the results are robust to the exclusion of the COVID-19
episode and the inclusion of the 2013 taper tantrum.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

55

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 2.3. Effects of Risk-Off Shocks

Figure 2.2. Dates and Features of Risk-Off Episodes

0.35 1. Responses of Capital Flows, Exchange Rate, and
4.2
Borrowing Costs
0.30
3.6
Pre-GFC
0.25
3.0
Post-GFC
0.20
2.4
0.15
1.8
0.10
1.2
0.05
0.6
0
0
−0.05
−0.6
−0.10
−1.2
Portfolio outflows
Exchange rate
EMBI spread
(percent of initial GDP)
pass-through
(percent, right scale)
(percent, right scale)

1. Dates of Risk-Off Episodes
Risk-off episode

8

RORO Index

6
4
2
0
−2
−4
1997 99 2001 03

05

07

09

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

2 2. Responses of Output and Prices
(Percent)
Pre-GFC
1
Post-GFC

2. Magnitude and Duration of Risk-Off Episodes and Contributions to
Variance of RORO Index
(Mean of standard deviation, months, and share)
Contributions to variance of
RORO Index (right scale)

Magnitude

Duration

Gold and currency
Credit spreads

Liquidity
Equity volatility

12

0
1.0
0.8

9

0.6

6

0.4

3

0.2

0

Pre-GFC

Post-GFC

0

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Federal Reserve Board; Haver Analytics; J.P. Morgan;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows risk-off episodes identified using an extended version of the RORO
Index of Chari, Dilts Stedman, and Lundblad (2023). The figure plots the standardized
three-month sum of the RORO Index—see Online Annex 2.2 for details. Panel 2 shows
the magnitude and duration of risk-off episodes and the variance decomposition of
the RORO Index into key contributing factors. The first two bars denote the mean of
the RORO Index (in standard deviations) during risk-off episodes and the length of the
episodes (in months) in the pre-GFC (1997–2009) and post-GFC (2010–24) periods. The
whiskers denote the range from minimum to maximum. GFC = global financial crisis;
RORO Index = Risk-On Risk-Off Index.

subcomponent indicates that—in both periods—about
45 percent of the RORO’s variation during risk-off
episodes is explained by credit spreads (Figure 2.2,
panel 2), just above 40 percent by equity volatility,
about 10 percent by liquidity risks, and the remainder
by currency risks.
Comparing the responses of emerging markets’
capital flows, exchange rate pass-through, and credit
spreads during risk-off episodes points to an increased
resilience to surges in risk aversion in the postcrisis
period. Since the global financial crisis, risk-off episodes have not been accompanied by outsized portfolio
56

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

−1
−2
−3

Real GDP

Consumer prices

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Federal Reserve Board; Haver Analytics; J.P. Morgan;
and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The bars denote the change in variables six months after the start of risk-off
episodes compared with similar time windows with no risk-off episodes. The
specifications control for past real GDP growth, consumer price inflation, and country
fixed effects. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. Risk-off episodes
are identified using an extended version of the RORO Index of Chari, Dilts Stedman,
and Lundblad (2023). The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC period is
2010–24. EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; GFC = global financial
crisis; RORO Index = Risk-On Risk-Off Index.

outflows, the exchange rate pass-through has become
muted, and the increase in sovereign spreads is about
one-fifth of what it used to be before the global financial crisis (Figure 2.3, panel 1). This greater resilience
is reflected in easier policy trade-offs: Six months after
the start of a risk-off episode, output losses are smaller
in the postcrisis period (1 percent of GDP) compared
with the precrisis period (1.8 percent of GDP), while
the precrisis 0.9 percent price increase disappeared
after the crisis (Figure 2.3, panel 2).11
11Economic crises in emerging markets typically have been associated with large output costs because they often represented declines
in the trend growth rather than fluctuations around a trend (Aguiar
and Gopinath 2007; Cerra and Saxena 2008). Replicating the exercises of Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) for 1997–2024 confirms that
the business cycles of the emerging markets in the sample began to
resemble more those of advanced economies after the global financial
crisis, although differences remain. See Online Annex 2.8 for details.

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

The Evolution of Policy Frameworks in
Emerging Markets

Figure 2.4. Monetary Policy Reaction Function

The increased resilience of emerging markets to
risk-off shocks after the global financial crisis corresponds to a period with a substantially larger number
of countries adopting inflation-targeting regimes and
fiscal rules and tightening macroprudential regulations.
However, ascribing such resilience to de jure changes
in policy frameworks can be misleading as de facto
policy frameworks vary substantially across countries
(Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger 2005; Carare and Stone
2006). This section describes progress achieved in the
implementation of monetary, macroprudential, and
fiscal frameworks—benchmarking it to the experience
of advanced economies—and quantifies the role of
improved policy frameworks as opposed to changing
external conditions.12

6 1. Estimates of Actual Reaction Function

1.5

4

1.0

2

0.5

0

0

Monetary Policy
Improvements in monetary policy frameworks can
be assessed in several dimensions (Box 2.2 describes
the milestones in the improvements of monetary
policy implementation among emerging market central
banks). The chapter first studies changes in the monetary policy reaction function by estimating Taylor rule
coefficients from a monthly regression that includes the
deviation of one-year-ahead expected inflation from the
inflation target and the real-time output gap, augmented with nominal effective exchange rate depreciation to capture fear of floating. The results show that
in the postcrisis period policymakers are less concerned
about exchange rate fluctuations, consistent with
smaller pass-through to prices and a shift toward inflation as the economy’s nominal anchor.13 At the same
time, the weight associated with deviations of inflation
expectations from the target declined, likely because of
improved central bank credibility and more strongly
anchored long-term inflation expectations (that is,
beyond the monetary policy horizon) (Figure 2.4,
panel 1). Consistent with this evidence, long-term
inflation expectations became better anchored over
time, as the sensitivity of three-year-ahead inflation
12See Online Annexes 2.3–2.5 for details on the exercises on
policy frameworks.
13The Taylor rule coefficients are obtained from the ordinary least
squares estimates of the monetary policy reaction function, in line
with the discussion in Carvalho, Nechio, and Tristao (2021), see
Online Annex 2.3. Estimates should be interpreted with caution,
however, as the size of monetary policy shocks tends to be larger in
emerging markets than in the US.

(Percent)

EMs, Pre-GFC
EMs, Post-GFC
AEs

−2
−4
−6

−0.5
−1.0

Inflation gap

Output gap
(right scale)

NEER appreciation
(right scale)

−1.5

4 2. Sensitivity of Long-Term Inflation to Short-Term Inflation Forecasts
Pre- and post-GFC averages

3
2
1
0
−1
1996 98 2000 02

04

06

08

10

12

14

16

18

20

22

22

24

5 3. Estimates of Perceived Reaction Function
4

Expected inflation
Expected real GDP growth

3
2
1
0
−1
−2
2004

06

08

10

12

14

16

18

20

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the Taylor rule coefficients from a regression of the policy rate
on its lag, the deviation of one-year-ahead inflation expectations from the target,
the real-time output gap, the NEER appreciation, and country and time fixed effects.
Panel 2 shows the sensitivity of long-term expected inflation to short-term inflation
forecasts, based on a regression of changes in the three-year-ahead inflation
expectations on changes in current year forecasts, following the methodology of
Chapter 4 of the October 2018 World Economic Outlook and Bems and others (2021).
Panel 3 shows the Taylor rule coefficients from a regression of the one-year-ahead
forecast of the three-month saving rate on next year inflation expectations, next
year real GDP forecast, and forecaster fixed effects; the figure is plotted for years
with at least 1,000 observations. The sample excludes EMs with fixed exchange rate
regimes, and Argentina, Türkiye, and Ukraine. In panel 1, the bars denote the point
estimates, and the whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. In panel 2, the
line denotes the cross-country average, and the shaded area denotes the interquartile
range. In panel 3, the lines denote the point estimates, and the shaded areas denote
90 percent confidence intervals. The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC
period is 2010–24. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; GFC =
global financial crisis; NEER = nominal effective exchange rate.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

57

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

forecasts to changes in one-year-ahead expected inflation declined substantially after the global financial
crisis (Figure 2.4, panel 2). With better-anchored inflation expectations, central banks in emerging markets
can shift attention to curbing output fluctuations. The
estimates capture this desirable countercyclical bias in
the postcrisis reaction function and are close to those
of advanced economies (Figure 2.4, panel 1).
When monetary policy is credible, professional
forecasters are expected to align their perceptions of the
central bank’s reaction function with its actual conduct.
Financial markets, however, may take longer to internalize such shifts, since credibility builds over time. Survey
data combining the interest rate expectations of individual forecasters with the corresponding macroeconomic
projections make it possible to estimate time-varying
Taylor rule coefficients (Bauer, Pflueger, and Sunderam
2024). Results show a progressive decline in the magnitude of the Taylor rule coefficient on expected inflation
over time and a marginal increase in the size of the
output gap coefficient, pointing to gains in monetary
policy credibility (Figure 2.4, panel 3).
A crucial aspect of monetary policy frameworks is
the extent of central banks’ independence from fiscal
pressures. (Box 2.3 shows that undermining central
bank independence by removing governors for political
reasons leads to currency depreciation and higher
inflation.) Emerging markets have traditionally been
plagued by fiscal dominance. When a central bank
is not independent, the government has an incentive
to rely on the central bank to finance its expenses,
which, in turn, limits the monetary authority’s ability
to raise interest rates to control inflation, weakening inflation-expectation anchoring.14 To assess how
much fiscal dominance continues to challenge central
bank independence in emerging markets, the analysis
examines the response of policy rates and long-term
inflation expectations—beyond the monetary policy
horizon—in the year after an unexpected increase in
military spending (Figure 2.5, panel 1).15 The results
are suggestive of fiscal dominance prior to the global
14Monetary financing is not the only channel through which
governments may exert pressure on central banks. For instance,
governments may also seek to ease financial conditions ahead of elections to stimulate economic activity and improve electoral prospects
(Dinç 2005).
15Military spending tends to be more exogenous to economic
conditions than other spending categories, but it is relatively small in
some emerging markets. However, the results are broadly consistent
with those obtained using primary spending in a structurally identified vector autoregression, as in Blanchard and Perotti (2002) and
Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Végh (2013).

58

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 2.5. Central Bank Independence and Autonomy
(Percent)

0.5 1. Responses of Inflation Expectations and Policy Rates to
Fiscal Spending Shocks
0.4
EMs, pre-GFC
0.3
EMs, post-GFC
AEs
0.2

0.05

0.1

0.01

0

0

0.04
0.03
0.02

−0.1

−0.01

−0.2

−0.02

−0.3

Policy rates

Inflation expectations
(right scale)

−0.03

0.20 2. Responses of Government Bond Yields, Exchange Rates,
Stock Prices, and Credit Spreads to Monetary Policy Shocks

1.6

0.15

1.2

Domestic monetary policy shocks
US monetary policy shocks

0.10

0.8

0.05

0.4

0

0

−0.05

3m yields

10y yields

Stock
prices
(right scale)

Nominal
EMBI
exchange
spread
rate
(right scale)
(right scale)

−0.4

Sources: Bloomberg; Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; J.P. Morgan, SIPRI Military
Expenditure Database; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the coefficients of regressions of the two-year-ahead inflation
expectations and next year policy rates on previous year military spending growth,
controlling for lags of inflation, exchange rate, GDP growth, inflation forecasts,
policy rate, government-debt-to-GDP ratio, government expenditure growth,
military spending growth, and country and year fixed effects. The pre-GFC period
is 1997–2009, and the post-GFC period is 2010–24. Panel 2 shows the responses of
government bond yields, nominal exchange rates, stock prices, and EMBI spreads
to one-standard-deviation domestic and US monetary policy shocks one day after
the shock. Domestic monetary policy shocks are identified as in Checo, Grigoli, and
Sandri (2024), and US monetary policy shocks are identified as in Bauer and Swanson
(2023). The sample varies by country according to data availability for domestic
monetary policy shocks, which for most countries cover only the post-GFC period.
The bars denote the point estimates, and the whiskers denote 90 percent confidence
intervals. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; EMBI = J.P. Morgan
Emerging Market Bond Index; GFC = global financial crisis; m = month; y = year.

financial crisis, when increases in spending were
followed by monetary easing and higher expected
inflation. Unlike before the global financial crisis,
central banks since then no longer accommodate fiscal
spending, leaving long-term inflation expectations close
to target, similarly to advanced economies.
Another key dimension of the implementation of
monetary policy is the extent to which it retains autonomy with respect to US monetary policy actions. The
literature has widely documented the powerful financial
spillovers of US monetary policy to the rest of the

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

world (Miranda-Agrippino and Rey 2020b; Chapter 4
of the April 2021 World Economic Outlook). Following Grigoli, Sandri, and Schrimpf (forthcoming), the
analysis in this chapter examines the impact of US and
domestic monetary policy shocks on emerging market financial variables the day after a monetary policy
announcement (Figure 2.5, panel 2). Domestic shocks
transmit strongly to government bond yields, especially
at the short end of the yield curve, indicating that monetary policy retains traction on borrowing conditions. A
one-standard-deviation domestic monetary policy shock
raises the three-month yield by about 10 basis points,
whereas US monetary policy shocks show a considerably smaller—and not statistically significant—passthrough to domestic borrowing conditions. However,
the effects on 10-year yields—whose risk premiums are
more sizable—are broadly comparable. US monetary
policy shocks, on the other hand, have larger effects
on riskier asset classes, including stock prices, exchange
rates, and credit spreads. A one-standard-deviation US
monetary policy shock leads to a 24 basis point decline
in stock prices, a 15 basis point exchange rate depreciation, and a 57 basis point widening of credit spreads. In
contrast, a one-standard-deviation domestic monetary
policy shock appreciates the currency by 7 basis points
and lowers stock prices by 9 basis points.

Foreign Exchange Interventions
Emerging markets have historically exhibited fear of
floating, owing to concerns over balance sheet mismatches, pass-through to inflation, and financial instability (Calvo and Reinhart 2002). Resistance to letting
the exchange rate float, in turn, has hindered the
development of hedging instruments and constrained
the depth of domestic financial markets. As a result,
many emerging markets’ central banks continued to
engage in substantial exchange rate management even
after adopting inflation-targeting frameworks.
While there is a case for foreign exchange interventions even within an inflation-targeting regime, the
benefits from deploying this policy tool diminish as
policy frameworks mature and financial frictions ease
(IMF 2023a).16 By leveraging cross-country variation
16Foreign exchange interventions can be warranted in the presence
of financial market imperfections—such as shallow markets or
currency mismatches—provided they are transparent, rules-based,
and do not undermine monetary policy credibility. Specifically, such
interventions can be used to counter destabilizing premia from foreign exchange market frictions, counter financial stability risks from
foreign exchange mismatches, and prevent potential de-anchoring of
inflation expectations.

in the degree of anchoring of inflation expectations,
the analysis shows that emerging markets with well-anchored inflation expectations intervene less in foreign
exchange markets in response to uncovered interest
parity deviations—differences between the change
in the exchange rate and what is predicted by interest rate differentials—triggered by risk-off episodes,
as the exchange rate pass-through tends to be lower
(Figure 2.6, panel 1). Similarly, when macroprudential regulation effectively limits the share of foreign
currency debt, financial stability concerns are reduced,
and the need for foreign exchange intervention is
diminished (Figure 2.6, panel 2).17 Thus, emerging
markets with strong policy frameworks are more likely
to allow deviations from uncovered interest parity to
play out rather than counteracting them by selling
foreign currency.

Fiscal Policy
This section first examines the design of fiscal
rules and the predictability of public finances. The
IMF’s Fiscal Rule Strength Index shows a continued
improvement in the legal basis, monitoring, enforcement, and flexibility of fiscal rules in emerging markets
(Figure 2.7, panel 1). However, progress has been
uneven, with emerging markets on average still lagging
advanced economies. In particular, countries often
struggle to balance the flexibility and resilience of fiscal
rules against the complexity of design while ensuring
that escape clauses are reserved for events beyond the
control of policymakers (Eyraud and others 2018).
Strong fiscal frameworks and fiscal rules can strengthen
the credibility of official projections, helping to anchor
private sector expectations of future fiscal policy (End
and Hong 2022; End 2023). Consistent with improvements in the predictability of fiscal policy in emerging
markets, professional forecasters have increasingly
aligned their expectations of budget deficits with official projections (Figure 2.7, panel 2).
An important dimension through which fiscal policy
can contribute to output stabilization is its degree
of countercyclicality. Emerging markets have historically implemented procyclical fiscal policy (Gavin
and Perotti 1997; Ilzetzki and Végh 2008; Frankel,
Végh, and Vuletin 2013), driven by limited access to
17Similar regressions examining net tightening of capital flow measures introduced in response to uncovered interest parity deviations
caused by risk-off shocks suggest that emerging markets also rely on
capital flow measures relatively less when their inflation expectations
are strongly anchored.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

59

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 2.6. Use of Foreign Exchange Interventions in
Response to Uncovered Interest Parity Deviations

Figure 2.7. Strength of Fiscal Frameworks
2.5 1. Strength of Fiscal Rules
(Index)
2.0

(Percent of GDP)

0.5 1. Conditioning on Inflation Expectations Anchoring
0

1.5
1.0

Weakly anchored—strongly anchored

0.5

−0.5

0

−1.0

−0.5
−1.0

−1.5
−2.0

0

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
Months since the risk-oﬀ shock

8

9

10

11

0.5 2. Conditioning on the Stringency of Macroprudential Regulation

EMs, pre-GFC

EMs, post-GFC

AEs

1.00 2. Elasticity of Private Sector Forecasts to Official Forecasts
(Percent)
EMs, pre-GFC
0.75
EMs, post-GFC
AEs
0.50

0

0.25

−0.5

0

Looser—tighter

−1.0
−1.5

EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
AEs

0

1

2

3

4
5
6
7
Months since the risk-oﬀ shock

8

9

10

11

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Foreign Exchange Intervention Dataset (Adler and
others 2024); Haver Analytics; IMF, Integrated Macroprudential Policy Database;
J.P. Morgan; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows the cumulative foreign exchange interventions (measured
as net purchases) in response to a 1 percentage point increase in the UIP deviation
instrumented with the RORO Index, conditional on inflation expectation anchoring
or the stringency of macroprudential regulation. Percentiles 10 and 90 of the
corresponding distributions are used to plot the figures. The regressions control
for lagged inflation, exchange rate, UIP deviation, foreign exchange interventions,
capital flow management measures, and country and time fixed effects. Inflation
expectation anchoring index is measured as in Bems and others (2021). The
stringency of macroprudential regulation is measured as the net cumulative
tightening in foreign exchange related capital requirements, loan restrictions,
and other position restrictions. The sample excludes EMs with fixed exchange
rate regimes. The lines denote the point estimates, and the shaded areas denote
90 percent confidence intervals. EMs = emerging markets; RORO Index = Risk-On
Risk-Off Index; UIP = uncovered interest parity.

international credit markets during downturns and
institutional weaknesses that encouraged loose fiscal
policy during upswings (Végh 2015). However, since
the global financial crisis, some emerging markets have
graduated from procyclical to countercyclical fiscal policy (bottom-right quadrant of Figure 2.8). For several
others, the co-movement of government expenditures
and slack is more negative than it was in the precrisis
period. On average, the degree of countercyclicality

60

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Current year forecasts

Planned adjustment

Sources: Alonso and others, forthcoming; Consensus Economics; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the bars denote the strength of fiscal rules in EMs and AEs during
the pre-GFC period and post-GFC period. The index of the strength of fiscal rules
is constructed based on four institutional criteria: (1) legal basis, (2) presence of a
monitoring mechanism, (3) enforcement and correction mechanism in place, and
(4) flexibility and resilience against shocks. Higher values correspond to stronger
fiscal rules. In panel 2, the bars denote the weight of private sector forecasts for
budget deficits in official forecasts, obtained as regression coefficients of private
sector forecasts on official forecasts captured in World Economic Outlook projections,
controlling for country fixed effects. “Current year forecasts” refer to the current
year fiscal balance, and “planned adjustment” refers to the expected change in the
fiscal balance between the current year and next year, both submitted in April. The
whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals. The pre-GFC period is 1997–2009,
and the post-GFC period is 2010–24. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging
markets; GFC = global financial crisis.

has moved closer to that of advanced economies.
Improvements in countercyclicality are most pronounced in the years following downturns in the
global business cycle, suggesting that emerging markets
increasingly use fiscal policy to shield their economies
from external shocks.18

18Online Annex 2.5 confirms that the change in primary expen-

ditures has become more negatively correlated with the change in
output gaps, controlling for initial debt burdens and country fixed
effects. More countercyclical fiscal policy is also present across commodity exporters, although fiscal policy in these countries is still less
countercyclical than in commodity importers.

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

Figure 2.8. Cyclicality of Government Expenditures

Figure 2.9. Fiscal Policy and Debt Sustainability

(Correlation coefficients)

EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC
AEs

1.2
1.0

0
−0.2
Post-GFC

0.10

1.4 1. Responses of Primary Balance to Interest Bill and Public Debt

0.2

0.08

0.8

0.06

0.6

0.04

0.4

−0.4

0.02

0.2

−0.6

0
EMs
AEs

−0.8
−1.0
−1.0

−0.8

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2
Pre-GFC

0

0.2

0.4

Interest bill
(percent of GDP)

Public debt
(percent of GDP, right scale)

2.5 2. Sensitivity of Spreads to Public and External Debt
0.6

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; World Bank, Cross-Country Database of Fiscal
Space; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Squares denote the correlation between the change in the ratio of primary
government expenditures to GDP and the change in the output gap for the pre-GFC
period (1997–2009) and the post-GFC period (2010–24). Primary government
expenditures are constructed as the difference between government revenues and
the primary balance. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging markets; GFC =
global financial crisis.

Finally, prudent fiscal policy that responds to debt
sustainability pressures is critical to keep interest
expenditures in check, contain sovereign spreads,
and ensure that maturing debt can be rolled over. To
assess whether increases in debt and interest expenditures lead to higher primary balances, this section
estimates a fiscal reaction function in the spirit of
Bohn (1998) and Mauro and others (2015), among
others. The sensitivity of the primary balance to debt
levels and interest expenditure in emerging markets
has increased since the global financial crisis (Figure
2.9, panel 1).19 Meanwhile, the sensitivity to the
interest bill has become close to 1 and exceeds that
of advanced economies. This stronger response may
reflect a greater reliance of emerging markets on
fiscal consolidation to avoid losing market access or
experiencing an increase in borrowing costs (Mendoza
and Ostry 2008). In fact, while improvements in fiscal
frameworks have translated into a greater capacity
to manage higher public and external debt with the
same external borrowing costs—suggesting a reduction in emerging markets’ debt intolerance (Reinhart,
19The greater sensitivity of the primary balance to debt sustainability pressures is particularly pronounced in countries with fiscal
rules in place (Online Annex 2.5).

0.5

EMs, pre-GFC
EMs, post-GFC

2.0

0

0.4

1.5

0.3

1.0

0.2

0.5

0.1

0

Public debt
(percent of GDP)

External debt
(percent of exports, right scale)

0

35 3. Time Required to Reduce Increase in Public Debt by Half
(Years)
30
Pre-GFC
Post-GFC
25
20
15
10
5
0

Low r − g

High r − g

Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook; J.P. Morgan; World Bank, Cross-Country
Database of Fiscal Space; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 reports the elasticities of the primary balance to the lagged values of
the interest bill and of public debt, all expressed in percent of GDP. The elasticities
are obtained using regressions of the primary balance on the lagged values of the
interest bill and public debt, and country and year fixed effects, jointly estimated for
the pre-GFC period (1997–2009) and the post-GFC period (2010–24) using period
dummies and interactions with the variables of interest while controlling for the output
gap and unemployment rate. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence intervals.
Panel 2 reports the elasticities of sovereign EMBI spreads to public debt and external
debt, expressed in percent of GDP and percent of exports. The elasticities are obtained
using regressions of the logarithm of the sovereign spread on public debt and external
debt and country fixed effects, jointly estimated for the pre-GFC and post-GFC periods
using period dummies and interactions with the variables of interest while controlling
for the output gap and unemployment rate. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence
intervals. Panel 3 plots the results of an illustrative simulation using coefficients from
the estimated reaction function for public debt. The exercise assumes a stable initial
public-debt-to-GDP ratio coupled with a shock that sends debt higher in a single year.
The simulation assumes a low interest-growth differential (r − g) of 0 and a high
interest-growth differential of 2 percent. AEs = advanced economies; EMs = emerging
markets; EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; GFC = global financial crisis.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

61

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Rogoff, and Savastano 2003)—sovereign spreads
remain sensitive to debt burdens (Figure 2.9, panel 2),
especially during periods of financial stress (Presbitero
and Wiriadinata 2022). In addition, even with a more
aggressive response, the estimated reaction functions
imply that the speed at which debt is brought back
down after an adverse shock is still relatively slow
(Figure 2.9, panel 3).

Figure 2.10. Factors Contributing to Emerging Markets’
Resilience during Risk-Off Episodes
(Percent)

1. Policy Determinants
Inflation
Better anchoring of inflation expectations
Higher reserve adequacy
Lower FX mismatches

The Contribution of Policy Frameworks
to Macroeconomic Stabilization
To answer the question of the chapter’s title, “good
luck or good policies?”—as posed by Easterly and
others (1993) in the context of drivers of economic
growth—this section quantifies the contribution of
policy frameworks relative to the contribution of
benign external conditions in boosting emerging market resilience to risk-off shocks. The analysis proceeds
in two stages.
The first stage explores the extent to which proxies for the quality of policy frameworks predict
growth and inflation in emerging markets during the
12 months following the start of a risk-off episode.
Specifically, the analysis considers a set of predetermined policy variables that capture monetary,
macroprudential, and fiscal policy frameworks and,
using episode-specific fixed effects, compares the
resilience of emerging markets with the varying quality
of policy frameworks while holding the impact of
external conditions constant.20 The results indicate
that stronger policies predict better performance and
that countries benefited to an extent consistent with
the strength of policy frameworks at the onset of the
risk-off episodes. For example, an emerging market
that entered a risk-off episode at the 75th percentile
of lower foreign exchange mismatches is expected to
experience 1.3 percentage point higher growth than an
emerging market that enters the same risk-off episode
at the 25th percentile (Figure 2.10, panel 1). Similarly,
an emerging market at the 75th percentile in terms of
20Episode fixed effects also control for the possibility that in recent

episodes, emerging market economies could have benefited from a
robust policy response and better policy frameworks in advanced
economies. The empirical approach is inspired by previous work
that studied the relevance of policy frameworks during the global
financial crisis or oil price collapses (Blanchard and others 2010;
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti 2011; Berkmen and others 2012; Grigoli,
Herman, and Swiston 2019). See Online Annex 2.6 for details on
the methodology.

62

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Real GDP growth

Stricter macroprudential policy
Lower external debt burden
Higher cyclically adjusted balance
Tighter CFM measures

−3
1.5

2. Contributions

1.0

−2

−1

0

(right scale)

0
−0.5
−1.0
−1.5

Real GDP growth

2

External conditions
Policy frameworks
Monetary
Macroprudential
Fiscal

0.5

1

Inflation

3
100
80
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
100

Sources: Allen and Juvenal 2025; Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; IMF, World
Economic Outlook; IMF, Integrated Macroprudential Policy Database; World Bank,
Cross-Country Database of Fiscal Space; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 reports the predicted change in real GDP growth and inflation during
risk-off episodes for a country moving from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the
distribution of a set of policy variables. See Online Annex 2.6 for details. The whiskers
denote 90 percent confidence intervals. Panel 2 plots the contributions of policy
frameworks and external conditions for the median emerging market in the post-GFC
period (2010–24) relative to the pre-GFC period (1997–2009). Variables proxying for
external conditions include real GDP growth in advanced economies, commodity
terms-of-trade shocks, and US FCI-G index. Anchoring of inflation expectations
and reserve adequacy account for monetary contributions, FX mismatches and
macroprudential policy measures for macroprudential contributions, and external
debt burden and the cyclically adjusted balance for fiscal contributions. CFM =
capital flow management; FCI-G index = Financial Conditions Impulse on Growth
index; FX = foreign exchange; GFC = global financial crisis.

anchoring of long-term inflation expectations tends to
experience 1.3 percentage point lower inflation.
Leveraging the estimates obtained in the first stage
of the analysis, the second stage quantifies the overall contributions of policy frameworks and external
conditions to growth and inflation dynamics in the
aftermath of risk-off shocks by accounting for the
observed changes in these factors in the periods before

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

and after the global financial crisis.21 Improved policy
frameworks contributed substantially to resilience
during recent risk-off episodes, raising growth by
0.5 percentage point and lowering inflation by 0.6 percentage point in the period since the global financial
crisis compared with the period before the crisis began
(Figure 2.10, panel 2). Improvements in monetary,
macroprudential, and fiscal frameworks contributed
roughly equally to the growth performance in the
years since the crisis. Lower inflation, instead, is largely
explained by improvements in monetary frameworks,
especially better-anchored inflation expectations. More
benign external conditions—captured by real GDP
growth in advanced economies, commodity terms-oftrade shocks, and global financial conditions—also
contributed to faster growth in emerging markets after
the global financial crisis, by 0.5 percentage point, but
did not ease inflationary pressures.

How to Deal with Future Risk-Off Shocks:
Evidence from Model Simulations
Economies featuring better policy frameworks enjoy
more favorable policy trade-offs, which leave room for
monetary policy to act countercyclically. This section
leverages a quantitative version of the IMF’s Integrated
Policy Framework (Q-IPF) model (Adrian and others
2020, 2021; Adrian, Gaspar, and Vitek 2022) to set
the stage by quantifying these trade-offs and then
elaborate on the appropriate policy response emerging from improved policy frameworks.22 The Q-IPF
contains four key frictions: (1) limited risk-bearing
capacity of agents in the foreign exchange market, giv21The relative contributions of monetary, macroprudential,
and fiscal policy frameworks to growth and inflation should be
interpreted with caution. First, the predetermined policy frameworks could still be endogenous to growth and inflation, even after
controlling for pre-trends. Second, there is no one-to-one mapping
between the policy variables shown in panel 1 of Figure 2.10 and
the three policy frameworks. While individual policy variables may
be more closely associated with a particular framework, they can
nonetheless influence others. For instance, the level of external debt
reflects both fiscal actions and macroprudential regulation.
22The Q-IPF model has two key advantages. First, as with the
conceptual IPF models (Basu and others, forthcoming; Basu and
Gopinath 2024), it jointly considers the role of monetary, foreign
exchange, and macroprudential policies in small open economies
while accounting explicitly for imperfections in trade and financial
markets that generate inefficient fluctuations in risk premiums.
Second, it is explicitly quantitative, can be solved nonlinearly, and
can be used to assess the impact of different combinations of policies
for countries with different sets of frictions.

ing rise to fluctuations in the uncovered interest parity
risk premium; (2) an occasionally binding external
debt limit, which can trigger sudden stops; (3) weakly
anchored inflation expectations that result in a high
pass-through of exchange rate changes to import
and consumer prices; and (4) balance sheet foreign
exchange mismatches, which amplify the contractionary impact of exchange rate changes in case of a sudden stop. The model—augmented with an endogenous
inflation indexation mechanism (Erceg, Lindé, and
Trabandt 2024) to capture a more realistic inflation
expectation de-anchoring process—is calibrated to two
types of small open emerging markets with flexible
exchange rates. The first type of economy resembles
the average emerging market in the period prior to
the global financial crisis and is subject to all four
frictions. The second represents the average emerging
market in the postcrisis period, featuring more strongly
anchored inflation expectations and smaller balance
sheet mismatches.23 The foreign economy is calibrated
to the US.

Quantifying Policy Trade-Offs and the
Probability of Sudden Stops
To illustrate the policy trade-offs in emerging
markets with policy frameworks of different quality,
the analysis considers a risk-off shock that triggers
capital outflows, and in turn causes the exchange rate
to depreciate by 10 percent (Figure 2.11). In the case
of the emerging market with strong policy frameworks
(that is, the postcrisis emerging market), the exchange
rate depreciation raises import prices, fueling price
and wage inflation. With strongly anchored inflation expectations, monetary policy can afford not to
tighten policy rates aggressively, allowing the temporary increase in inflation to subside while prioritizing
output stabilization, with output supported by higher
net exports.
Policymakers in emerging markets with weak policy
frameworks (that is, the pre–global financial crisis
emerging market), on the other hand, face harsher policy trade-offs. For the same size depreciation, a greater
exchange rate pass-through to domestic prices leads to
23The model calibration to average emerging market conditions
prior to and after the global financial crisis is illustrative and should
be interpreted as equally informative about the current cross-country
differences among emerging markets. See Online Annex 2.7 for
details about the model calibration.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

63

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 2.11. Policy Trade-Offs in Response to Risk-Off Shocks
EM with weak policy frameworks
12 1. Nominal Exchange Rate
Depreciation
10
(Percent)

EM with strong policy frameworks
2. CPI Inflation
(Percentage points)

1.2
0.8

8
6

0.4

4
2

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters

0.8 3. Nominal Policy Rate
(Percentage points)

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters
4. Output Growth
(Percent)

−0.4

4

7

EMs with weak policy frameworks
EMs with strong policy frameworks

6

3

5
4

2

3

0

0.4

−0.1

0.2

2

1

1
0

0.2
0.1

0.6

0

(Percent)

0

0
−2

Figure 2.12. Probability and Severity of Sudden Stops

Sudden-stop probability

Credit spread during sudden stops
(right scale)

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure reports the probability and severity of sudden stops, based on
stochastic simulations as described in Adrian and others (2020, 2021). The average
severity of a sudden stop is measured using the credit spread, computed as the
borrowing rate minus policy rate. EMs = emerging markets.

−0.2
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters

−0.3

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents the model simulations in response to a capital flow shock
that triggers a 10 percent depreciation of the nominal exchange rate. The EM with
weak policy frameworks is calibrated according to the characteristics of the average EM
during the pre-GFC period, while the EM with strong policy frameworks is calibrated to
the characteristics of the average EM during the post-GFC period. CPI = consumer price
index; EM = emerging market; GFC = global financial crisis.

a substantial increase in inflation. The central bank is
then forced to tighten aggressively, depressing domestic
demand. In the emerging market with strong policy
frameworks output declines by only 0.1 percentage
point and inflation rises by 0.2 percentage point, but
the emerging market with weak policy frameworks suffers a 0.3 percentage point contraction in output and a
1 percentage point increase in inflation.
Another important implication of the improvement in policy frameworks is the lower likelihood and
severity of sudden stops. The period after the global
financial crisis witnessed substantial changes in the balance sheets of several emerging markets. The average
net foreign asset position increased by 13 percent of
GDP relative to the period before the crisis, and the
share of external liabilities denominated in domestic
64

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

currency rose by 12.5 percentage points (see Chapter 3
of the October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report
for recent trends in local currency bond markets).
These improvements keep the economy farther from
the external debt limit, lowering by half the probability
of experiencing a sudden stop, to 1.5 percent. Conditional on experiencing a sudden stop, the severity of
these events also dropped significantly. The average
credit spread during sudden stops fell from 6.2 percent
to 5.2 percent (Figure 2.12).

Costs of Delaying Monetary Tightening
The inflation surge after the pandemic period
created a particularly challenging environment for
emerging markets facing risk-off shocks. Global
supply chain disruptions led to a rapid and persistent
increase in prices (Chapter 2 of the October 2024
World Economic Outlook), which amplified the adverse
dynamics typically seen in emerging markets with weak
policy frameworks. However, many emerging markets
responded with timely and aggressive tightening of
their monetary policy, which proved crucial in preventing de-anchoring of inflation expectations (English,
Forbes, and Ubide 2024).
To quantify the costs associated with a delayed and
dovish monetary policy response, the analysis focuses

0

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

Figure 2.13. Costs of Delaying Monetary Tightening for
Emerging Markets with Weak Policy Frameworks

first regime.24 While both regimes eventually succeed in
bringing inflation back to target by the end of the third
year following the shock, late tightening leads to a substantially larger rate hike of 1.4 percentage points and
results in a more pronounced output contraction—by
0.7 percent of GDP—five quarters after the shock.

Standard Taylor rule
12 1. Nominal Exchange Rate
Depreciation
10
(Percent)

Late tightening
2. CPI Inflation
(Percentage points)

2.0
1.6

8

1.2

6

0.8

4

0.4

2
0

3.0

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters
3. Nominal Policy Rate
(Percentage points)

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters
4. Output Growth
(Percent)

2.5

0
−0.4

2.0
1.5

−0.8

1.0

−1.2

0.5
0.0

0

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19
Quarters

−1.6

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents the model simulations in response to a capital flow shock
that triggers a 10 percent depreciation of the nominal exchange rate combined with
a cost-push shock. The EM with weak policy frameworks is calibrated according to the
characteristics of the average EM during the pre-GFC period. In the “late tightening”
scenario, the central bank first attempts to look through the inflation surge. CPI =
consumer price index; EM = emerging market; GFC = global financial crisis.

on emerging markets with weak frameworks and
compares simulation results for two monetary policy
regimes in response to a combination of a risk-off
shock and a persistent cost-push shock (Figure 2.13), as
in the postpandemic environment, causing a 10 percent
nominal exchange rate depreciation and 0.5 percentage
point increase in inflation. In the first regime, monetary policy follows a standard Taylor rule, with the
central bank responding to inflationary pressures in a
timely and aggressive manner. In the second regime,
the policy response is delayed and subdued: The central
bank initially attempts to look through the inflation
surge, but later, to address the already elevated inflation, it ends up raising policy rates by more than in the

The Role of Foreign Exchange Interventions
Finally, the model is used to examine the role of foreign exchange interventions, contrasting the outcomes
for emerging markets with different policy frameworks
and assuming sufficient reserve buffers. In response to
a risk-off shock, and without intervention, the nominal
exchange rate depreciates by 10 percent. However,
when the central bank intervenes—running down
reserves by 3 percent of GDP—it helps counter capital
outflows, limiting the rise in the uncovered interest
parity risk premium and halving the magnitude of the
exchange rate depreciation.25
The results show that, despite foreign exchange
interventions, the residual exchange rate depreciation
in the emerging market with weak policy frameworks still fuels inflation, reflecting a relatively high
exchange rate pass-through. Yet two years after the
shock, the cumulative price increase is 0.7 percentage point lower than in the no-intervention scenario.
This moderates the need for monetary tightening and
reduces the associated output loss by 0.9 percentage
point (Figure 2.14, panel 1). In contrast, for emerging
markets with strong policy frameworks, the benefits of
foreign exchange intervention are more modest. Given
better-anchored inflation expectations, inflation is
only 0.1 percentage point lower when the central bank
intervenes, and output is marginally higher despite the
monetary policy tightening, as the nominal depreciation boosts net exports (Figure 2.14, panel 2).26
24In the model, prices and wages tend to rise faster when inflation
is far from the target, leading to inflation persistence. This mechanism worsens the trade-off associated with delayed monetary tightening, as inflation becomes more difficult to contain once expectations
begin to drift.
25The effectiveness of foreign exchange interventions in offsetting
the nominal exchange rate depreciation depends on the depth of foreign exchange markets. As this is assumed to be the same in emerging markets with weak and strong policy frameworks, the resulting
depreciation when the central bank intervenes is the same.
26Adrian and others (2021) compare the effects of capital flow measures and foreign exchange interventions in a similar model setup. The
simulations suggest that these tools offer similar advantages. While
the analysis in the chapter pertains to foreign exchange interventions,
comparing countries with strong and weak policy frameworks, the
conclusions can be extended to the use of capital flow measures.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

65

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 2.14. Effects of Foreign Exchange Interventions
(Percent)

6 1. Emerging Markets with Weak Policy Frameworks
With FXI

4

3
Without FXI

2

2

1

0

0

−2

−1

−4

Nominal
exchange rate
depreciation

CPI inflation
(right scale)

Nominal policy rate
(right scale)

Output growth
(right scale)

−2

6 2. Emerging Market with Strong Policy Frameworks
With FXI

5

3
Without FXI

4

2

3
2

1

1
0

Nominal
exchange rate
depreciation

CPI inflation
(right scale)

Nominal policy rate
(right scale)

Output growth
(right scale)

0

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure presents the model simulations in response to a capital flow shock
that triggers a 10 percent depreciation of the nominal exchange rate in the absence
of FXI. The FXI scenarios involve a decline in FX reserves by 3 percent of GDP. The EM
with weak policy frameworks is calibrated according to the average characteristics
of the pre-GFC EM, while the EM with strong policy frameworks is calibrated to the
average characteristics of the post-GFC EM. FX reserves are expressed in percent of
trend GDP; the nominal exchange rate depreciation and output growth are reported
in percent; and CPI inflation and the nominal policy rate are expressed in percentage
points. The figure reports the FX reserves when the shock hits, the cumulative change
over the two years following the shock for CPI inflation and output, and the two-year
average for the nominal exchange rate depreciation and policy rate changes. CPI =
consumer price index; EM = emerging market; FX = foreign exchange; FXI = foreign
exchange intervention; GFC = global financial crisis.

Conclusions and Policy Implications
Since the global financial crisis, most emerging
markets have shown remarkable resilience to risk-off
shocks, including in the aftermath of the COVID-19
shock and the inflation surge that followed the
pandemic. While favorable external conditions have
certainly bolstered the capacity of these economies to
withstand risk-off shocks, attributing recent resilience solely to good luck does not tell the whole story.
Improved policy frameworks have played a critical
role in supporting macroeconomic stability, allowing
countries to implement good policies.
66

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

An analysis of the evolution of policy frameworks
in emerging markets reveals, on average, substantial
progress over time, which helped narrow the gap
with advanced economies, although the degree of
progress varies across countries. De facto improvements—which extend beyond the de jure adoption of
inflation targeting and fiscal rules—have enhanced the
implementation and credibility of monetary and fiscal
policies, which in turn have led to more restrained
use of foreign exchange interventions. In other words,
emerging markets’ investment in upgrading policy
frameworks has yielded high returns, boosting resilience against risk-off shocks. Comparing the typical
risk-off episode since the global financial crisis with a
typical episode before the crisis suggests that improved
frameworks accounted for 0.5 percentage point higher
growth and 0.6 percentage point lower inflation. In
contrast, favorable external conditions supported faster
growth, contributing 0.5 percentage point, but did not
ease inflationary pressures.
Based on the results from a rich set of empirical
exercises to assess policy frameworks and model simulations aimed at quantifying policy trade-offs under
different policy frameworks, this chapter offers some
key insights for policymakers to navigate a shock-prone
global environment:
• Monetary policy. Clear communication of policy
objectives and the central bank’s reaction function
can help anchor inflation expectations and enhance
credibility. This, in turn, eases policy trade-offs,
allowing the central bank to focus more on output
stabilization. In addition, reinforcing and safeguarding central bank independence are essential to
ensure that policy decisions remain insulated from
political pressures and to mitigate the risk of fiscal
dominance. This continues to be relevant in the
current context, in which inflation expectations are
anchored and fiscal demands are mounting, tempting policymakers to yield to political pressure.
• Foreign exchange interventions. Foreign exchange
interventions can play a stabilizing role for
less-resilient emerging markets, but the benefits
diminish as policy frameworks strengthen. Given the
costs associated with foreign exchange interventions,
efforts to anchor inflation expectations and reduce
balance sheet mismatches—including through the
implementation of macroprudential frameworks—
should be promoted, lessening the need for intervention in the foreign exchange market.
• Fiscal policy. Stronger fiscal guardrails are needed to
foster fiscal discipline when high uncertainty and

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

spending pressures mount. Investing in a credible medium-term fiscal framework that combines
more flexible rules with strong and independent
fiscal institutions is essential to signal fiscal commitment while allowing for a more countercyclical
fiscal policy. Compliance with fiscal rules can be
improved through a risk-based fiscal anchor tailored
to the country’s debt-carrying capacity and robust
correction mechanisms (Acalin and others 2025).
Sound public debt management could also mitigate
the effect of negative shocks on borrowing costs
(Pedersoli and Presbitero 2023). These policies would
help forge a path to debt sustainability and build up
fiscal buffers (see Chapter 2 of the October 2021
Fiscal Monitor). Deepening local currency bond
markets and increasing resident investors’ participation can also improve resilience (see Chapter 3 of the
October 2025 Global Financial Stability Report).
• Trilemma, not dilemma? Taken together, the
observed resilience to risk-off episodes, the reduced
marginal benefits of foreign exchange interventions
(and capital flow measures) where policy frameworks
are strong, and the evidence of greater domestic
monetary policy autonomy all point to a gradual—though uneven across countries—shift away
from the dilemma (Rey 2015) toward the classic
Mundell-Fleming trilemma.
• Looking ahead, emerging markets with strong
frameworks are better positioned to navigate risk-off
shocks. These economies benefit from easier policy
trade-offs and face a lower risk of sudden stops. In
contrast, countries with weaker frameworks should
resist the temptation to delay monetary tightening, which can de-anchor inflation expectations
and increase output losses. In these economies,
foreign exchange interventions can provide temporary relief. However, they are costly and should
neither substitute nor postpone necessary efforts to
anchor inflation expectations and reduce balance
sheet mismatches. More broadly, foreign exchange
interventions should not hinder the warranted
adjustment of macroeconomic policies, including of
the exchange rate.

The visible improvements in policy frameworks and
their role in strengthening emerging market resilience
to recent risk-off episodes should not lead to complacency. Three key considerations warrant attention:
• First, external conditions may not remain favorable.
Although global financial conditions have been
relatively benign since the global financial crisis, this
can change quickly, leading to reduced consumption
and investment in advanced economies. Meanwhile,
rising global interest rates pose significant risks for
emerging markets with already elevated debt. And
geopolitical tensions can trigger unfavorable changes
in emerging markets’ terms of trade.
• Second, the economic fallout from the COVID-19
pandemic and the energy shock triggered by Russia’s
war in Ukraine has led to higher public-debt-toGDP ratios in many emerging markets. The eroded
fiscal space may limit the ability of fiscal policy to
respond effectively to future shocks, underscoring
the need to rebuild fiscal capacity before the next
period of market stress. Moreover, the postpandemic
inflation surge may have put inflation expectations
on edge, which means central banks must maintain a steady and credible commitment to inflation
stability.
• Third, the risks of policy backsliding should not be
overlooked. Recent gains in credibility and institutional strength cannot be taken for granted. As
Box 2.3 illustrates, central bank independence may
come under pressure from politically driven appointments, potentially leading to fiscal dominance, loss
of credibility, and inflation surges. Likewise, fiscal
rules could be weakened or disregarded if political
economy pressures dominate, undermining fiscal
credibility.
For these reasons, the significant strides of emerging
markets in recent years—and their effective responses
to recent shocks—should be viewed as a foundation
for further strengthening monetary, macroprudential,
and fiscal policy frameworks, as well as rebuilding policy buffers to better withstand an increasingly uncertain global environment.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

67

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 2.1. IMF Arrangements and Emerging Market Resilience

The author of this box is Giulio Lisi.
1This analysis considers the Flexible Credit Line (FCL)
arrangements approved in 2009 for Colombia, Mexico, and
Poland; the FCLs approved for Chile and Peru in 2020, in the
context of the COVID-19 shock; and the 2023 Morocco FCL.
It also considers the Short-Term Liquidity Line approved for
Chile in May 2022.
2This result is consistent with earlier work (Lisi 2022) and
robust to the use of a synthetic control approach (Abadie 2021).
On average, spreads remain more than 20 basis points lower than
their synthetic counterparts in the 60 trading days following the
announcement.

68

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 2.1.1. IMF Precautionary Arrangements and
Their Role during Risk-Off Episodes
0

1. Changes in Sovereign Spreads
(Basis points)

−10
−20
−30
−40
1 day

5 days
10 days
Trading days after FCL/SLL announcement

600 2. Precautionary Instruments and
0.8
Global Risk Events
500
0.6
FCL/SLL/PLL users
400
EMBI EMs weighted
300
0.4
sample
200
0.2
100
0
0
−100
−0.2
−200
−300
−0.4
3 months 6 months 3 months 6 months
Spreads
Outflows (right scale)

Cumulative change in capital outflows
(percent of annual GDP)

−50

Change in sovereign spreads
(basis points)

The IMF’s precautionary instruments—the Flexible
Credit Line (FCL), Precautionary and Liquidity Line
(PLL), and Short-Term Liquidity Line (SLL)—are
integral components of the institution’s lending
toolkit. They provide qualifying members with
up-front access to IMF resources, with no or limited
conditionality, and aim to bolster market confidence
while offering insurance against external shocks.
These instruments are available to qualifying members with very strong (or sound, in the case of the
PLL) economic fundamentals and policy frameworks,
a sustained history of implementing (and currently
implementing) very strong policies, and a commitment to maintain these policies.
This box assesses the effectiveness of these instruments in supporting emerging markets’ access to
international financial markets and bolstering market
confidence during periods of heightened global risks.
An event study around the approval of new FCL and
SLL arrangements shows a significant and increasingly
pronounced decline in sovereign spreads in the days
following the announcements of the arrangements
(Figure 2.1.1, panel 1).1,2
Precautionary instruments also help during risk-off
episodes. Local projections with inverse propensity
score weighting (Angrist, Jordà, and Kuersteiner
2018) show that emerging markets with precautionary arrangements experienced significantly smaller
increases in spreads and capital outflows during the
two most recent risk-off episodes, compared with peers
with similar fundamentals (Figure 2.1.1, panel 2).
These findings indicate that the value of these instruments may increase in a shock-prone environment, in
which recurring stress episodes can challenge emerging
markets integrated into global trade and finance (IMF
2023b).

Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P.; Emerging Portfolio Fund Research;
Haver Analytics; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 shows the estimated change in spreads following the
announcement of a new FCL or SLL, relative to other emerging markets
included in the EMBI. Estimates control for global financial variables
and lagged spreads. Panel 2 shows the impulse response functions
from local projections with country and year fixed effects. Shocks
are identified at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine. Estimates are derived using inverse probability
weighting for 2017–19 macroeconomic outcomes (EMBI spreads, debt
to GDP, fiscal deficit, and current account balance) on the probability
of observing a precautionary arrangement in the sample. The whiskers
denote 90 percent confidence intervals. EMs = emerging markets;
EMBI = J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index; FCL = IMF Flexible
Credit Line; PLL = IMF Precautionary and Liquidity Line; SLL = IMF
Short-Term Liquidity Line.

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

Box 2.2. Milestones in Developing Monetary Policy Frameworks
The cornerstone of an effective monetary policy
framework is a clear nominal anchor and a strong,
credible commitment to price stability. While the
nominal anchor may differ across countries, in all
cases it must be viewed as clear and credible, providing a basis for price- and wage-setting decisions.
Over the past two and a half decades, many emerging
market central banks have made substantial progress
in modernizing their monetary frameworks—sometimes prompted by disorderly market conditions and
at other times facilitated by favorable circumstances.
Many of these reforms have placed price stability at
the core of their mandates, often supported by IMF
technical assistance. This box elaborates on some key
milestones.
Limiting the scope for political interference is essential to credibly establishing a commitment to price
stability.1 In some emerging markets, fiscal reforms
and government endorsement of the central bank’s
price stability objective played complementary roles in
mitigating concerns about fiscal dominance. Investments in regulatory, supervisory, and macroprudential
frameworks have also been crucial to allow monetary
authorities to pursue price stability objectives. The
Bank of Thailand offers a good example because its
adoption of inflation targeting (IT) was supported and
complemented by ambitious reforms in Thai financial
sector policy.
Depending on the monetary framework, other key
milestones may involve building adequate foreign
The author of this box is Thomas J. Carter.
1See Brandao-Marques and others (2024) for evidence of links
between government debt and long-term inflation expectations
in emerging markets, along with complementary evidence from
David, Pienknagura, and Yépez (2025).

exchange reserves or clarifying the appropriate role
of the exchange rate. For emerging markets with IT,
especially those transitioning from fixed exchange rate
regimes, allowing for greater exchange rate flexibility and keeping foreign exchange interventions to
an appropriate minimum are both critical because
they help avoid any perception of targeting specific
exchange rate levels and confusion about the “true”
nominal anchor. The Central Bank of Chile and the
South African Reserve Bank are examples of strong
commitment to exchange rate flexibility and limited
foreign exchange interventions.
Other key milestones relate to the development of central banks’ operational, technical, and
decision-making frameworks. Many emerging market
central banks have surmounted a range of challenges
in building their operational capacity to manage
liquidity and steer short-term interest rates while
promoting the development of interbank, securities,
and other markets key to monetary transmission. The
National Bank of Georgia, for example, prioritized a
range of policy reforms in these areas to support the
development of its IT framework.
A final key milestone is the development of a strong
framework for communicating monetary policy decisions and the rationales behind them. Many emerging
markets’ central banks, including the examples noted
in this box, have developed sophisticated communications frameworks centered around regular press
conferences, policy statements, and monetary policy
reports.2 These investments help enhance accountability and improve public understanding of the central
banks’ objectives and reaction functions.
2See Unsal, Papageorgiou, and Garbers (2022) for evidence of
improvement in central banks’ communication frameworks.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

69

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 2.3. Macroeconomic Effects of Undermining Central Bank Independence
Implementing monetary policy without political
interference is essential for central bank independence
because it helps anchor inflation expectations and
ensure price stability (Blinder 2000; Bernanke 2010;
Fischer 2015; Ioannidou and others 2025). This box
examines the macroeconomic effects of diminished
central bank independence by leveraging politically
motivated governor transitions, which occur when the
appointment or removal of the incumbent does not
follow clear, rule-based procedures; does not prioritize
professional qualifications; and does not preserve the
central bank’s operational independence.
Based on 134 governor transitions in 11 advanced
economies and 16 emerging markets since 2000,
transitions are classified by whether news reports at the
time of the transition mentioned political interference
and political motive.1 Politically motivated transitions
have been far more common in emerging markets
(50, about half of all transitions) than in advanced
economies (5, or 8 percent of all transitions). Moreover, inflation expectations are less well anchored in
countries with more frequent politically motivated
transitions (Figure 2.3.1): They exceed targets by
about 1 percent where such transitions are the majority and by over 2 percent where they are the norm.
Expectations remain close to target in countries without political transitions. This correlation holds within
both advanced and emerging market economies. No
such relationship is found with de jure measures of
central bank independence (Romelli 2024).
To identify the effects of politically motivated
transitions on macroeconomic variables, the analysis
uses difference-in-differences local projections (Dube
and others 2023), controlling for past changes in
macroeconomic variables, as well as country and time
fixed effects. Six months after politically motivated
transitions, real rates fall by 1.6 percentage points,
exchange rates depreciate by 3.1 percent, and inflation
and inflation expectations rise by 1.7 percentage points
relative to countries with similar macroeconomic
fundamentals that did not experience a governor
transition. The exchange rate also tends to depreciate, but the effect is not statistically significant. The
limited number of politically motivated transitions
in advanced economies makes it hard to have robust
The authors of this box are Marijn A. Bolhuis, Rui Mano, and
Hedda Thorell.
1The classification relies on subjective assessments based on
information published for each transition on the website https://
centralbanking.com, supplemented with news reported by
Bloomberg and the Financial Times.

70

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 2.3.1. Effects of Politically Motivated
Transitions
1. Inflation Targets, Long-Term Inflation Expectations, and
De Jure Central Bank Independence
Long-term inflation expectations (percent)
Inflation target (percent)
Measure of de jure independence
(index, right scale)

8
6

0.8
0.6

4

0.4

2

0.2

0

0

1–25
26–50
51–75
76–100
Share of politically motivated transitions (percent)

0

8 2. Outcomes Following Governor Transitions after Six Months
(Percentage points)
6
Politically motivated transitions
Nonpolitically motivated
4
transitions
2
0
−2
−4

Real
interest rate

Realized
inflation

Nominal
exchange rate

Inflation
expectations

Sources: Consensus Economics; Haver Analytics; Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development; Romelli 2024; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: In panel 1, the bars show the mean of deviations from target of
five-year-ahead inflation expectations, yellow rectangles the inflation
target, and red squares the de jure central bank independence from
Romelli (2024). All variables are expressed by country groups from 2000
to 2024 based on the frequency of politically motivated transitions. In
panel 2, the bars show average changes in the outcomes six months after
politically motivated transitions (blue bars) and nonpolitically motivated
transitions (red bars). The real interest rate is defined as the difference
between the 3-month deposit rate (or equivalent) and 12-month-ahead
inflation expectations. A positive change in the nominal exchange rate
indicates a depreciation. Specifications control for pre-trends in outcome
variables, a fixed set of macroeconomic control variables, and country
and time fixed effects. The whiskers denote 90 percent confidence
intervals. The sample includes all transitions that can be used to isolate
the causal effect of the transition.

evidence of differential effects across country groups.
Results for emerging market economies are very
close to those for the overall sample, while those for
advanced economies are either smaller in magnitude
(for expected inflation and exchange rate depreciation)
or not significant.

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

References
Abadie, A. 2021. “Using Synthetic Controls: Feasibility, Data
Requirements, and Methodological Aspects.” Journal of Economic Literature 59 (2): 391–425.
Abiad, A., J. Bluedorn, J. Guajardo, and P. Topalova. 2015.
“The Rising Resilience of Emerging Market and Developing
Economies.” World Development 72: 1–26.
Acalin, J., V. Alonso, C. Arroyo, R. Lam, L. Martinez, A.D.M.
Nguyen, F. Roch, G. Sher, and A. Solovyeva. 2025. “Fiscal
Guardrails against High Debt and Looming Spending
Pressures.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 25/004, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Acosta-Henao, M., A. Fernández, P. Gomez-Gonzalez, and S.
Kalemli-Özcan. 2024. “Firm Financing during Sudden Stops:
Can Governments Substitute Markets?” NBER Working
Paper 33283, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Adler, G., K. S. Chang, R. C. Mano, and Y. Shao. 2024. “Foreign
Exchange Intervention: A Data Set of Official Data and Estimates.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 57 (5): 1241–73.
Adrian, T., C. J. Erceg, M. Kolasa, J. Lindé, and P. Zabczyk.
2021. “A Quantitative Microfounded Model for the Integrated Policy Framework.” IMF Working Paper 21/292,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Adrian, T., C. J. Erceg, J. Lindé, P. Zabczyk, and M. J. Zhou.
2020. “A Quantitative Model for the Integrated Policy Framework. IMF Working Paper 20/122, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Adrian, T., V. Gaspar, and F. Vitek. 2022. “A Medium-Scale
DSGE Model for the Integrated Policy Framework.” IMF
Working Paper 22/015, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Adrian, T., F. Natalucci, and J. Wu. 2024. “Emerging Markets
Navigate Global Interest Rate Volatility.” IMF Blog, January
31.
Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath. 2007. “Emerging Market Business
Cycles: The Cycle Is the Trend.” Journal of Political Economy
115 (1): 69–102.
Aizenman, J., D. Park, I. A. Qureshi, J. Saadaoui, and G. Salah
Uddin. 2024. “The Performance of Emerging Markets during
the Fed’s Easing and Tightening Cycles: A Cross-Country
Resilience Analysis.” Journal of International Money and
Finance 148: 103169.
Alfaro, L., M. Calani, and L. Varela. 2021. “Granular Corporate
Hedging under Dominant Currency.” NBER Working Paper
28910, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
MA.
Alonso, V., C. Arroyo, O. Aydin, V. Balasundharam, H. R.
Davoodi, W. R. Lam, A. Nguyen, N. Salazar Ferro, G. Sher,
and A. Solovyeva. Forthcoming. “Fiscal Rules at a Glance:
An Update 1985–2024.” International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Angrist, J. D., Ò. Jordà, and G. M. Kuersteiner. 2018. “Semiparametric Estimates of Monetary Policy Effects: String

Theory Revisited.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics
36 (3): 371–87.
Apeti, A. E., B. W. W. Bambe, J. L. Combes, and E. D. Edoh.
2024. “Original Sin: Fiscal Rules and Government Debt in
Foreign Currency in Developing Countries.” Journal of Macroeconomics 80: 103600.
Basu, S., E. Boz, G. Gopinath, F. Roch, and D. Unsal. Forthcoming. “A Conceptual Model for the Integrated Policy
Framework.” Econometrica.
Basu, S., and G. Gopinath. 2024. “An Integrated Policy Framework (IPF) Diagram for International Economics.” IMF
Working Paper 2024/038, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Bauer, M. D., C. E. Pflueger, and A. Sunderam. 2024. “Perceptions about Monetary Policy.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
139 (4): 2227–78.
Bauer, M. D., and E. T. Swanson. 2023. “A Reassessment of
Monetary Policy Surprises and High-Frequency Identification.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 37 (1): 87–155.
Bekaert, G., E. C. Engstrom, and N. R. Xu. 2022. “The Time
Variation in Risk Appetite and Uncertainty.” Management
Science 68 (6): 3975–4004.
Bems, R., F. Caselli, F. Grigoli, and B. Gruss. 2021. “Expectations’ Anchoring and Inflation Persistence.” Journal of International Economics 132: 103516.
Bergant, K., A. Fernández, K. Teoh, and M. Uribe. Forthcoming. “Redrawing the Landscape of Cross-Border Flow
Restrictions: Modern Tools and Historical Perspectives.”
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bergant, K., F. Grigoli, N. J. Hansen, and D. Sandri. 2024.
“Dampening Global Financial Shocks: Can Macroprudential
Regulation Help (More Than Capital Controls)?” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 56 (6): 1405–38.
Berkmen, S. P., G. Gelos, R. Rennhack, and J. P. Walsh. 2012.
“The Global Financial Crisis: Explaining Cross-Country
Differences in the Output Impact.” Journal of International
Money and Finance 31 (1): 42–59.
Bernanke, B. S. 2010. “Central Bank Independence, Transparency, and Accountability.” In Speeches at the Institute for
Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank
of Japan, Tokyo, Japan, May, vol. 25.
Blanchard, O. J., H. Faruqee, M. Das, K. J. Forbes, and L. L.
Tesar. 2010. “The Initial Impact of the Crisis on Emerging
Market Countries.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
263–323.
Blanchard, O., and R. Perotti. 2002. “An Empirical
Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of Changes in
Government Spending and Taxes on Output.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 117 (4): 1329–68.
Blinder, A. S. 2000. “Central-Bank Credibility: Why Do We
Care? How Do We Build It?” American Economic Review
90 (5): 1421–31.
Bohn, H. 1998. “The Behavior of US Public Debt and Deficits.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (3): 949–63.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

71

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Brandao-Marques, L., M. Casiraghi, G. Gelos, O. Harrison, and
G. Kamber. 2024. “Is High Debt Constraining Monetary
Policy? Evidence from Inflation Expectations.” Journal of
International Money and Finance 149: 103206.
Caballero, R. J., and G. Kamber. 2019. “On the Global Impact
of Risk-Off Shocks and Policy-Put Frameworks.” NBER
Working Paper 26031, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Calvo, G. A., and C. M. Reinhart. 2002. “Fear of Floating.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (2): 379–408.
Campa, J. M., and L. S. Goldberg. 2005. “Exchange Rate
Pass-Through into Import Prices.” Review of Economics and
Statistics 87 (4): 679–90.
Carare, A., and M. R. Stone. 2006. “Inflation Targeting
Regimes.” European Economic Review 50 (5): 1297–315.
Carrière-Swallow, Y., B. Gruss, N. E. Magud, and F. Valencia. 2021.
“Monetary Policy Credibility and Exchange Rate Pass-Through.”
International Journal of Central Banking 17 (3): 61–94.
Carvalho, C., F. Nechio, and T. Tristao. 2021. “Taylor Rule
Estimation by OLS.” Journal of Monetary Economics 124:
140–54.
Cerra, V., U. Panizza, and S. C. Saxena. 2013. “International
Evidence on Recovery from Recessions.” Contemporary Economic Policy 31 (2): 424–39.
Cerra, V., and S. C. Saxena. 2008. “Growth Dynamics: The
Myth of Economic Recovery.” American Economic Review
98 (1): 439–57.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2020. “Capital
Flows in Risky Times: Risk-On/Risk-Off and Emerging
Market Tail Risk.” NBER Working Paper 27927, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2021. “Taper
Tantrums: Quantitative Easing, Its Aftermath, and Emerging
Market Capital Flows.” Review of Financial Studies 34 (3):
1445–508.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2022. “Global
Fund Flows and Emerging Market Tail Risk.” NBER Working Paper 30577, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Chari, A., K. Dilts Stedman, and C. Lundblad. 2023. “Risk-On
Risk-Off: A Multifaceted Approach to Measuring Global
Investor Risk Aversion.” NBER Working Paper 31907,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Checo, A., F. Grigoli, and D. Sandri. 2024. “Monetary Policy
Transmission in Emerging Markets: Proverbial Concerns,
Novel Evidence.” BIS Working Paper 1170, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Chen, H., and P. Tillmann. 2025. “Monetary Policy Spillovers:
Is This Time Different?” Journal of International Money and
Finance 152: 103278.
Cobham, D. 2025. “Monetary Policy Frameworks from 1999
to 2023.” SSRN Working Paper 5156869, Social Science
Research Network.

72

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Das, M., G. Gopinath, and Ş. Kalemli-Özcan. 2022. “Preemptive Policies and Risk-Off Shocks in Emerging Markets.”
NBER Working Paper 29615, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
David, A. C., S. Pienknagura, and J. F. Yépez. 2025. “Can
Fiscal Consolidations Announcements Help Anchor Inflation
Expectations?” Journal of International Money and Finance
151: 103247.
Dinç, S. I. 2005. “Politicians and Banks: Political Influences on
Government-Owned Banks in Emerging Markets.” Journal of
Financial Economics 77 (2): 453–79.
Dube, A., D. Girardi, Ò. Jordà, and A. M. Taylor. 2023. “A
Local Projections Approach to Difference-in-Differences
Event Studies.” NBER Working Paper 31184, National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Easterly, W., M. Kremer, L. Pritchett, and L. H. Summers. 1993.
“Good Policy or Good Luck? Country Growth Performance
and Temporary Shocks.” Journal of Monetary Economics 32
(3): 459–83.
End, N. 2023. “Big Brother Is Also Being Watched: Measuring
Fiscal Credibility.” Journal of Macroeconomics 77: 103548.
End, N., and M. J. H. Hong. 2022. “Trust What You Hear:
Policy Communication, Expectations, and Fiscal Credibility.”
IMF Working Paper 22/036, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
English, B., K. Forbes, and A. Ubide, eds. 2024. Monetary Policy
Responses to Post-Pandemic Inflation. London: CEPR Press.
Erceg, C. J., J. Lindé, and M. Trabandt. 2024. “Monetary Policy
and Inflation Scares.” IMF Working Paper 24/036, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Erel, I., J. Liebersohn, C. Yannelis, and S. Earnest. 2023.
“Monetary Policy Transmission through Online Banks.”
NBER Working Paper 31380, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Eyraud, L., M. X. Debrun, A. Hodge, V. D. Lledo, and
M. C. A. Pattillo. 2018. “Second-Generation Fiscal Rules:
Balancing Simplicity, Flexibility, and Enforceability.” IMF
Staff Discussion Note 18/004, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Fischer, S. 2015. “Central Bank Independence.” 2015 Herbert
Stein Memorial Lecture, National Economists Club, November 4, Washington, DC.
Frankel, J. A., C. A. Végh, and G. Vuletin. 2013. “On Graduation from Fiscal Procyclicality.” Journal of Development
Economics 100 (1): 32–47.
Gavin, M., and R. Perotti. 1997. “Fiscal Policy in Latin
America.” In NBER Macroeconomic Annual, vol. 12, edited
by B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg, 11–61. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Ghosh, M. A. R., M. J. D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi. 2017.
“Managing the Tide: How Do Emerging Markets Respond
to Capital Flows?” IMF Working Paper 17/069, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

CHAPTER 2

EMERGING MARKET RESILIENCE: GOOD LUCK OR GOOD POLICIES?

Goldberg, L. S., and S. Krogstrup. 2023. “International Capital
Flow Pressures and Global Factors.” Journal of International
Economics 146: 103749.
Gomez-Gonzalez, J. E., O. M. Valencia, and G. A. Sánchez.
2022. “How Fiscal Rules Can Reduce Sovereign Debt Default
Risk.” Emerging Markets Review 50: 100839.
Gourinchas, P. O., and M. Obstfeld 2012. “Stories of the
Twentieth Century for the Twenty-First.” American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1): 226–65.
Grigoli, F., A. Herman, and A. Swiston. 2019. “A Crude Shock:
Explaining the Short-Run Impact of the 2014–16 Oil Price
Decline across Exporters.” Energy Economics 78: 481–93.
Grigoli, F., D. Sandri, and A. Schrimpf. Forthcoming. “Tug
of War: Global Spillovers and Monetary Policy Autonomy
in Emerging Markets.” International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Gruss, B., and S. Kebhaj. 2019. “Commodity Terms of Trade: A
New Database.” IMF Working Paper 19/021, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Hardy, B., D. Igan, and E. Kharroubi. 2024. “Resilience in
Emerging Markets: What Makes It, What Could Shake It?”
BIS Bulletin 88, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Harikrishnan, N., B. Silk, and E. Yoldas. 2023. “US Interest
Rates and Emerging Market Currencies: Taking Stock 10
Years after the Taper Tantrum.” FEDS Notes, October 4.
Hofmann, B., I. Shim, and H. S. Shin. 2016. “Sovereign Yields
and the Risk-Taking Channel of Currency Appreciation.” BIS
Working Paper 538, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.
Ilzetzki, E., E. G. Mendoza, and C. A. Végh. 2013. “How Big
(Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?” Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (2): 239–54.
Ilzetzki, E., and C. A. Végh. 2008. “Procyclical Fiscal Policy in
Developing Countries: Truth or Fiction?” NBER Working
Paper 14191, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023a. “Integrated Policy
Framework—Principles for the Use of Foreign Exchange
Intervention.” IMF Policy Paper 2023/061, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2023b. “Review of the
Flexible Credit Line, the Short-Term Liquidity Line and the
Precautionary and Liquidity Line, and Proposals for Reform.”
IMF Policy Paper 2023/039, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Ioannidou, V., S. Kokas, T. Lambert, and A. Michaelides.
2025. “(In)dependent Central Banks.” SSRN Working Paper
4262695, Social Science Research Network.
Kose, A., and E. Prasad. 2010. Emerging Markets: Resilience and
Growth amid Global Turmoil. Washington, DC: Brookings
Institution.

Lane, P. R., and G. M. Milesi-Ferretti. 2011. “The
Cross-Country Incidence of the Global Crisis.” IMF Economic
Review 59 (1): 77–110.
Levy-Yeyati, E., and F. Sturzenegger. 2005. “Classifying
Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds vs. Words.” European
Economic Review 49 (6): 1603–35.
Liang, P., M. Sampaio, and S. Sarkisyan. 2024. “Digital
Payments and Monetary Policy Transmission.” Ohio State
University Working Paper 2024-14, Charles A. Dice Center
for Research in Financial Economics, Columbus, OH.
Lisi, G. 2022. “IMF’s Precautionary Lending Instruments: Have
They Worked?” IMF Working Paper 22/256, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Mauro, P., R. Romeu, A. Binder, and A. Zaman. 2015. “A
Modern History of Fiscal Prudence and Profligacy.” Journal of
Monetary Economics 76: 55–70.
Mendoza, E. G., and J. D. Ostry. 2008. “International Evidence
on Fiscal Solvency: Is Fiscal Policy ‘Responsible’?” Journal of
Monetary Economics 55 (6): 1081–93.
Miranda-Agrippino, S., and H. Rey. 2020a. “The Global Financial Cycle after Lehman.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 110:
523–28.
Miranda-Agrippino, S., and H. Rey. 2020b. “US Monetary
Policy and the Global Financial Cycle.” Review of Economic
Studies 87 (6): 2754–76.
Obstfeld, M., J. D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi. 2019. “A Tie That
Binds: Revisiting the Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies.” Review of Economics and Statistics 101 (2): 279–93.
Pedersoli, S., and A. F. Presbitero. 2023. “Public Debt Management and Private Financial Development.” Economic Systems
47 (1): 101010.
Presbitero, A. F., and U. Wiriadinata. 2022. “Public Debt and
r - g at Risk.” SSRN Working Paper 3710776, Social Science
Research Network.
Reinhart, C. M., K. S. Rogoff, and M. A. Savastano. 2003.
“Debt Intolerance.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34:
1–74.
Rey, H. 2015. “Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial
Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence.” NBER Working Paper 21162, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Romelli, D. 2024. “Trends in Central Bank Independence: A
De-Jure Perspective.” BAFFI CAREFIN Centre Research
Paper 217, Bocconi University, Milan.
Unsal, D. F., C. Papageorgiou, and H. Garbers. 2022. “Monetary Policy Frameworks: An Index and New Evidence.”
IMF Working Paper 22/022, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Végh, C. A. 2015. “Fiscal Policy in Emerging Markets: Procyclicality and Graduation.” NBER Reporter 4: 8–12.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

73

CHAPTER

3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE
GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Countries increasingly seek to reshape their economies
by targeting public support to specific firms and sectors.
Their motives vary widely but often include an emphasis
on developing strategic industries, with a view to raising
future productivity and growth and reducing reliance
on imports in key sectors such as energy. This chapter
leverages theoretical models, empirical data, and case
studies to investigate under what conditions such industrial policies are most likely to succeed. Using a stylized
model drawn from the infant industry literature, it shows
that industrial policies can help onshore production and
catch up with the global technology frontier in a sector
where firms become more efficient the more they produce.
But this comes at the cost of higher consumer prices during
the catch-up phase and is sensitive to initial conditions
such as the size of the technology gap, how quickly firms
learn by doing, and market size. Such policies can also
incur substantial public expenditure, an important
consideration at a time of elevated debt and limited fiscal
space in many countries. Empirically, recent industrial
policies—mainly a combination of direct support and
subsidized financing—are associated with improved
outcomes in the targeted sector, but the magnitudes are
small. Moreover, such interventions are likely to spill over
to other sectors, which is difficult to identify empirically.
Use of a multisector quantitative trade model to examine
the aggregate policy impact finds that imperfect targeting
of interventions could reduce aggregate productivity as
factors of production move from one sector to another. For
example, broad-based energy sector subsidies could lessen
reliance on fossil fuel imports while reducing productivity
in non-energy sectors. Overall, the chapter findings suggest
that policymakers should be keenly aware of opportunity
costs and trade-offs: While industrial policy can raise
production in the targeted sector, this needs to be balanced
against other considerations such as fiscal cost, higher
The authors of this chapter are Shekhar Aiyar (co-lead), Hippolyte
Balima, Mehdi Benatiya Andaloussi (co-lead), Thomas Kroen, Rafael
Machado Parente, Chiara Maggi, Yu Shi, and Sebastian Wende, with
contributions from Lorenzo Rotunno and Simon Voigts and research
assistance from Shrihari Ramachandra and Yarou Xu. Andrés Rodríguez-Clare was the external advisor. The chapter benefited from
comments by Mary E. Lovely and internal seminar participants and
reviewers.

consumer prices, and possible resource misallocation.
Appropriate targeting and safeguards, market discipline, and complementary structural reforms are crucial
elements of a well-designed industrial policy package.

Introduction
The global slowdown in growth, coupled with
concerns about disruptions to supply chains and
energy security, has prompted renewed interest in
policies that enhance growth and resilience, including industrial policy (IP). These interventions look
to spur structural transformation by providing public
support in the form of subsidies and other preferences
to specific industries or firms. The focus on targeting
individual businesses or sectors is key; while more
general policy measures such as structural reforms and
macroeconomic policies can also shape the economy,
these would not qualify as IP. In principle, IP can
address market failures that constrain the development
of production capacity—for example, if costs fall with
expanded production at the sector level. In practice,
IP takes multiple forms and is used to pursue diverse
objectives, including boosting productivity growth,
protecting manufacturing jobs, building resilience by
creating local supply chains, establishing self-reliance in
key sectors such as energy, and diversifying the economy by developing infant industries. The salience of IP
as a policy tool has been rising against the backdrop of
rising geopolitical tensions.
Since 2009, the number of new IP interventions
has increased significantly, with a notable acceleration
following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic
(Figure 3.1, panel 1). Nowhere is this more apparent
than in the energy sector. A third of all IPs implemented between 2009 and 2022 targeted at least one
energy sector product, of which about 80 percent were
rolled out in energy-dependent countries (Figure 3.1,
panel 2). Several countries have turned to IP to boost
energy security by reducing dependence on fossil fuel
imports and accelerating electrification of the economy.
Amid the global surge in IP, this chapter provides
an analytical framework to analyze the domestic

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

75

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 3.1. Global Evolution of Industrial Policies
2,000 1. Rise in Usage Globally
(Number of new interventions)
1,600

AEs

EMDEs

1,200
800
400
0

2009 10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

2. Energy Industrial Policy by Dependence
(Percent, 2009–22)
100

Energy
AEs—net exporters

Non-energy
EMDEs—net importers

AEs—net importers
EMDEs—net exporters

80
60
40
20
0

Share of total industrial
policy measures

Share of energy-related industrial
policy measures

Sources: Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; U.S. Energy Information
Administration; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Industrial policy (IP) is defined as state action directed at changing the structure
of the domestic economy, following the text-based approach of Juhász and others
(2022, 2025). In panel 1, the bars show the number of new IP interventions introduced
by AEs and EMDEs. In panel 2, the first bar shows the share of IP interventions targeting
energy-related products, defined as those including at least one energy product at
the 6-digit Harmonized System (HS) code level. The second bar breaks down these
interventions by countries’ energy dependence and income group. Countries are
net energy importers (exporters) if their energy consumption exceeds (is less than)
production. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies.

macroeconomic benefits, risks, and trade-offs associated with such strategies. The analysis focuses on both
sector-level and aggregate outcomes, including value
added, productivity, and resource allocation, while
illustrating economic trade-offs and risks. Throughout,
a focus on the energy sector serves both to illustrate
general principles and to highlight an important
special case of industrial policy. Many countries are
striving to reduce dependence on fossil fuel imports by
promoting domestic production of clean technology.
Moreover, the energy sector has extensive linkages with
other sectors, making its performance consequential for
the whole economy. To keep the analysis focused and
76

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

tractable, the chapter centers on the policy effects of
IP on domestic outcomes, as those are likely to be of
first-order importance for policymakers.1
The chapter addresses four main questions:
• How have industrial policies evolved recently? What
types of industrial policy instruments have been
deployed? What are their main stated objectives?
• What are the main economic justifications for the use
of IP? What types of market failures are IPs meant to
address? What kinds of trade-offs do they present,
both in theory and in practice? And what are the
opportunity costs, in terms of fiscal resources with
alternative uses?
• Empirically, what are the effects of IP on targeted
sectors? How do they differ along key sector and firm
characteristics? Do the impacts of policies targeted
at the energy sector differ from those rolled out in
other sectors?
• What are the general equilibrium effects of IP? Does
the impact in a given sector spill over to other
sectors as resources are reallocated? Can IP distort
allocative efficiency and increase misallocation across
sectors? Do policies specific to the energy sector
deliver better macroeconomic outcomes than policies targeted at other sectors?
To address these questions, the chapter employs an
array of empirical analyses, model-based simulations,
and case studies. The main findings are as follows:
• Industrial policies are making a strong comeback.
They are being used to pursue an array of domestic
objectives. Recent IPs often take the form of
substantial subsidies and aim to achieve multiple
domestic objectives—ranging from productivity
gains and technological catch-up to job protection
and self-sufficiency in key sectors, including energy.

1Although not the focus of this chapter, large-scale industrial
policy can also have cross-country spillovers and trigger retaliation
by trading partners. Recent IMF work has found that the domestic effects of industrial policies are sensitive to the subsidies and
trade barriers deployed by trading partners (Hodge and others
2024; Rotunno and Ruta 2025) and that recent industrial policies
have triggered retaliation (Evenett and others 2024). Theoretical
frameworks find that global coordination on industrial policies
could improve global outcomes, while retaliation could spark a
wasteful global subsidy race (Ju and others 2024; Lashkaripour
and Lugovskyy 2023). Box 3.2 finds that, in the EU, national-level
subsidies that target local firms can negatively affect competing firms in other European countries. Beyond trade spillovers,
Gopinath and others (2025), Graziano and others (2024), and Ruta
and Sztajerowska (2025) show that industrial policies can shape
cross-border foreign direct investment flows.

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

The chapter begins by documenting the recent rise
in industrial policies. It then offers a stylized model of
infant industry protection, which is used to illustrate
the intertemporal trade-offs and risks of IP. A dynamic
macroeconomic model with a granular energy sector
augments the analysis by examining the trade-offs
associated with IP targeting this sector. Case studies
illustrate the mechanisms described in the model and
add context on supporting frameworks and implementation challenges. Next, the chapter provides empirical
evidence that IPs are associated with modest improvements in targeted sectors and that effects vary across
countries and sectors. A quantitative trade model
shows that IP creates spillovers to untargeted sectors
and how this can cause misallocation and reduce
aggregate effects. The chapter concludes with implications for policy.2
2The analyses in this chapter reinforce the guidance put forward
in recent IMF publications on industrial policy (see for example
Chapter 2 of the April 2024 Fiscal Monitor and IMF 2024).

Figure 3.2. Industrial Policy Interventions by Instrument
and Estimated Fiscal Costs
1. Interventions by Instrument
(Percent implemented globally, 2009–22)
Subsidized financing
AEs

• IP effectiveness is not guaranteed and depends on
design, implementation, and broader macroeconomic conditions. Model simulations and empirical
evidence show that IPs can help jump-start domestic industries, especially when productivity scales
up with output. But their efficacy is sensitive to
sector-specific characteristics that can be hard to
determine in advance, such as the rate of learning by
doing and potential market size. As shown by case
studies of Korea and Brazil, appropriate targeting,
careful implementation, complementary policies,
and macroeconomic stability are all keys to success.
• IPs typically involve trade-offs between competing
objectives. Onshoring production in a strategic sector
might lead to higher consumer prices for a prolonged period, and delivering certain IP objectives
might require substantial fiscal outlays, which represent an important opportunity cost. For example,
fiscal resources could be deployed on high-return
structural reforms that do not require granular sectoral information to implement.
• While IPs can deliver sector-level gains, translating
these into broader economic benefits might remain
challenging. Even when sector-level outcomes are
positive, IPs can generate negative cross-sector
spillovers, drawing away resources from sectors that
are not targeted. If those sectors are highly productive, or exhibit economies of scale, then aggregate
productivity could fall.

Direct support
Other policies
Subsidized financing

EMDEs

CHAPTER 3

Direct support
Other policies
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

2. Estimate of Fiscal Costs
(Percent of GDP, 2021)
China1
United Kingdom
Sample average of
EU countries
Canada
Israel
0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

4.5

Sources: Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao 2025; Juhász and others 2022, 2025;
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) 2025; and IMF
staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 highlights the distribution of industrial policies implemented between
2009 and 2022 by instrument used, for AEs and EMDEs. “Subsidized financing” and
“direct support” refer to subsidy-based measures. “Other policies” encompasses both
tariff and nontariff trade barriers. See Online Annex 3.2 for a detailed breakdown of
these policy categories. Panel 2 shows the estimated fiscal costs of industrial policy
measures as a share of GDP for selected economies with available data. These costs
include support provided through grants, tax expenditures, and financial instruments.
The US is not included in panel 2 owing to the lack of comparable fiscal cost estimates.
However, available data from the OECD indicate that US fiscal spending on green
industrial policies adopted as part of COVID-19 recovery packages amounted to about
3.2 percent of one year’s GDP. EU countries plot the sample average across Denmark,
France, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, and Sweden. AEs = advanced economies;
EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies.
1
China data refer to 2023 and include land subsidies.

The Return of Industrial Policy
The resurgence of industrial policy is marked by a
predominance of subsidy-based measures (Figure 3.2,
panel 1).3 They comprise subsidized financing—
3Online Annex 3.1 provides references to data sources used
throughout the chapter. The stylized facts presented in this section
are broadly consistent with the use of alternative algorithms that
categorize IP using the Global Trade Alert (GTA) in the recently
developed New Industrial Policy Observatory (NIPO) database
(Evenett and others, forthcoming). All online annexes are available at
www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

77

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

subsidies intended to alleviate financial constraints
for targeted firms and sectors, such as loan guarantees
and interest payment subsidies—and direct support
measures, which include transfers such as financial
grants and state aid.4 In both advanced economies and
emerging market and developing economies, subsidized financing and direct support measures accounted
for over 80 percent of interventions, with other forms
of IP, encompassing tariffs and nontariff measures,
playing only a marginal role.5
It is inherently difficult to aggregate the total fiscal
costs of these subsidies as they entail a wide range
of policy instruments, which differ across countries
and can be implemented by the central government,
through state-owned enterprises (SOEs), or at the local
level. Notwithstanding these caveats, available estimates, including new ones for China (Box 3.1), indicate that the fiscal cost of industrial policy is sizable,
amounting to a few percentage points of GDP per year
(Figure 3.2, panel 2).

Economic Rationale and Motivations
The economic justification for IP is typically
grounded in correcting market failures, which prevent
an efficient allocation of resources. The analyses in
this chapter focus on infant industries, which are at
an early stage of development domestically and lag
the global technology frontier. If these industries see
production costs decline as production increases, a case
can be made for targeted public support to facilitate
expansion.6 While such justifications were historically prominent in emerging market and developing
economies, as illustrated by Brazil and Korea in the
4For a more detailed breakdown of the intervention types classified under each of the three policy categories, see Online Annex 3.2.
There are no comprehensive data on the fiscal costs attached to
each intervention type. In principle, and although this is beyond
the scope of this chapter, different instruments could carry different
risks, including stemming from the level of public and private sector
debt, the availability of credit, financial stability, and governance,
including corruption.
5However, the use of these other forms of industrial policy has
grown at a faster rate in recent years than subsidized financing and
direct support measures in advanced economies, based on data available through the end of 2022.
6Industrial policy can target other market failures (including
those stemming from asymmetric information, collective action, and
coordination failures), help kick-start sectors that face high fixed
costs (Baquie and others 2025) or relax financial frictions (Itskhoki
and Moll 2019). They have also been used to overcome infrastructure gaps, spur diversification (Juhász, Lane, and Rodrik 2023),
and target industries with large positive spillovers domestically
(Garcia-Macia and Sollaci 2025).

78

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

1970s, they are increasingly prevalent in advanced
economies to support strategic domestic industries that
lag the global frontier, such as clean technologies and
semiconductors.
In practice, the motivations for IP vary widely
and might sometimes overlap. Enhancing competitiveness in strategic sectors emerges as a primary
driver of interventions in both advanced economies
and emerging market and developing economies
(Figure 3.3, panel 1).7 In advanced economies, climate
mitigation and global value chain resilience also feature prominently among policy objectives. Although
noneconomic concerns such as national security and
geopolitics appear to be less prominent, it is likely that
they drive, at least in part, the underlying motivation
for proximate objectives like strategic competitiveness
and global value chain resilience (Aiyar and others
2023).
The sectoral breakdown of industrial policy interventions shows that advanced economies target
mostly high-tech manufacturing and the energy sector
(Figure 3.3, panel 2). In emerging market and developing economies, by contrast, the focus is broader,
and interventions are more evenly distributed across
high- and low-technology manufacturing, energy, and
services.

Energy Independence and Rising Demand for
Electricity
Industrial policies in the past 15 years have targeted
energy products to spur a structural transformation
of the energy sector, help reduce global greenhouse
gas emissions in some countries, boost or diversify energy production in net exporting countries,
and promote energy independence. In fact, many
net-energy-importing countries rely heavily on fossil
fuel imports to meet their energy needs. For example, fossil fuel imports meet more than 80 percent of
energy needs in Japan, close to 50 percent in the EU,
and about 20 percent in China (Figure 3.4, panel 1).
Although importing energy can be a cost-efficient
solution in many countries, it is often viewed as

7As noted in Evenett and others (2024), a policy’s motive is
categorized as “strategic competitiveness” if it is aimed at promoting
domestic competitiveness or innovation in a strategic product or
sector. Strategic sectors include medical equipment, semiconductors,
critical minerals, military/civilian dual use, low-carbon technology,
and other advanced technologies.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Figure 3.3. Motivation for Industrial Policies and Targeted
Sectors
AEs

Figure 3.4. Industrial Policy for Energy Security and
Increasing Needs for Electricity
100 1. Fossil Fuel Imports as a Share of Energy Demand in 2022
(Percent)
75

EMDEs

1. Stated Motivation
(Share of measures, 2009–22, percent)

50
25

Strategic competitiveness

0

Climate mitigation

−50

−25
−75

0

10

20

30

40

50

2. Targeted Sectors
(Percent implemented globally, 2009–22)
High-tech manufacturing
Low-tech manufacturing

Share of electricity in energy
consumption

National security/
geopolitical concern

CAN

IDN

Services
Other
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

Sources: Evenett and others 2024; Evenett and others, forthcoming; Global Trade Alert;
Juhász and others 2022, 2025; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Industrial policy (IP) is defined as state action directed at changing the structure
of the domestic economy, following the text-based approach of Juhász and others
(2022, 2025). Panel 1 highlights the stated motivations provided by governments for
introducing new IP between 2009 and 2022, based on the subset of measures with
available data. Panel 2 shows the distribution of IP interventions by targeted sector in
AEs and EMDEs between 2009 and 2022. Sectors are classified according to NACE Rev.
2 (2-digit level). High-technology manufacturing includes computer, electronic, and
optical products; electrical equipment; chemical products; pharmaceuticals; basic and
fabricated metals; machinery and equipment; and motor vehicles and other transport.
Low-tech manufacturing includes wood; paper; printing; textiles; apparel; leather;
rubber, plastic, and nonmetallic mineral products; furniture; other manufacturing;
and repair. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing
economies; GVC = global value chain.

increasing vulnerability to external shocks, posing risks
to national security and resilience.
To reduce reliance on fossil fuel imports, policymakers have encouraged substituting key fossil
fuel uses with electricity, contributing to a growing
share of electricity in final energy consumption (see
Figure 3.4, panel 2). In parallel, electricity production
itself has become ever less dependent on fossil fuels—
particularly in advanced economies (dashed blue
line)—with the swift adoption of new technologies

BRA USA CHN GBR

EU

FRA DEU

ITA

34 2. Electricity Share of Final Energy Consumption
(Percent)
32
AEs
EMDEs
AEs, right scale
EMDEs, right scale
30

75

28

60

26

55

24

50

22

45

20
2000 02

Commodities, energy, and food

ZAF

04

06

08

10

12

14

16

18

70
65

20

JPN

Share of fossil fuel in electricity
production

−100

GVC resilience

40
22

Sources: Eurostat; International Energy Agency; U.S. Energy Information
Administration; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Panel 1 plots energy imports over energy demand. Energy demand = production
+ imports − exports − international marine bunkers − international aviation bunkers
+/− stock changes. Fossil fuel includes coal, peat, and oil share; crude, natural gas
liquids, and feedstocks; natural gas; and oil products. Fossil fuel imports are measured
as net imports, with positive values indicating net importers and negative values
indicating net exporters. In panel 2, the sample includes 34 AEs and 27 EMDEs. The
lines represent the simple average across countries within each group. Data labels in
the figure use International Organization for Standardization (ISO) country codes.
AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market and developing economies;
EU = European Union.

such as renewables. Industrial policy has often been
deployed to help develop the domestic manufacturing
of clean technologies, often in their infant industry
stage, which will be analyzed in a subsequent section.
Focus on the power sector has also been motivated by
the increasing demand for electricity spurred by the
adoption of emerging technologies—including electric
vehicles and data centers. By 2030, global electricity
demand from data centers and electric vehicles will
surpass the current electricity consumption of most
countries (Bogmans and others 2025; Online Annex
Figure 3.2.2).
Against this backdrop of rising interest in onshoring production in strategic industries, the next
section examines the theoretical basis for supporting
an industry that currently lags behind the world
International Monetary Fund | October 2025

79

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

technology frontier. It draws from the infant industry
literature, which emphasizes potential efficiency gains
from supporting a sector in its early stage of domestic
development.

protection and learning by doing.10 Moreover, the
foreign leader is assumed to have accumulated five
times more experience than the home country in the
infant industry.11

A simple stylized model with two countries and
sectoral learning-by-doing dynamics serves to illustrate
the sector-level benefits countries might seek to capture
through IP, the trade-offs involved, and how these
depend on countries’ starting conditions. The model
is grounded in the infant industry protection literature
(Harrison and Rodríguez-Clare 2010; Melitz 2005;
Redding 1999) and has two key features:
• Sectoral learning by doing in the infant industry
sector: To capture the potential for catch-up to the
global frontier, the model features a young hightech sector—the infant industry—with learning
by doing.8 In the infant industry, marginal costs
decrease over time with accumulated production
experience. This creates a rationale for policy interventions through industrial policies, based on purely
economic considerations. The other sector features
no learning by doing and captures a composite of
more mature industries.9
• Home country lagging the global frontier: The
model features two countries, one of which is the
technological leader with greater accumulated
production experience and hence lower initial
costs. Throughout, the model simulations take the
perspective of the technological follower, which is
assumed to start at a 30 percent cost disadvantage
relative to the leader. This is broadly consistent with
the midpoint for cost gaps between technological
leaders and followers in studies of infant industry

Industrial policy, consisting of a mix of subsidies
and trade protections, can incentivize the onshoring of
high-tech production in the home country, but with
other attendant dynamic effects. Figure 3.5 compares
outcomes for a country that starts behind the global
frontier in the infant industry sector across two scenarios: one in which the home country rolls out IP in the
sector (solid blue line) and a baseline scenario in which
it does not (dashed line).12
Under IP, domestic production ramps up more
than tenfold because of production subsidies and trade
protection. As domestic producers learn by doing, their
production costs drop rapidly (Figure 3.5, panels 1
and 2). This comes with two costs. First, even as IP
leads domestic production costs to drop significantly
over time, consumer prices increase temporarily and
remain elevated for a prolonged period (Figure 3.5,
panel 3). This occurs because trade protection increases
the price consumers face for imported goods, and
domestic production costs remain higher than those
prevailing at the frontier during the catch-up phase.
Second, the subsidy imposes a fiscal cost, which will be
explored in more detail later in the chapter.
The conditions under which IP may boost domestic production and enable rapid domestic learning by
doing depend, however, on key parameters and initial
conditions. Figure 3.6 shows how domestic production
costs, production volumes, and consumer prices under
the same industrial policy mix compare at the end
of the period, depending on key sectoral characteristics in the home country. Results from the previous
experiment, in light blue, are compared with results

8In the model, the learning-by-doing parameter summarizes
how accumulated experience can drive production costs lower over
time—for example, as production processes are improved or as workers gain know-how on the factory floor. These improvements are
particularly salient at early stages of development in an industry.
9The sectoral learning rate in the high-tech sector is set at
19 percent in the simulations, implying that a doubling of sectoral
output leads to a 19 percent decline in marginal costs. This is
broadly consistent with observed empirical cost curves and estimates
in the academic literature (Barwick and others 2025 for electric
vehicles [EVs]) and industry estimates (BNEF 2024). Cooper and
Johri (2002) cite 20 percent as the typical learning rate in their literature review, whereas Barwick and others (2025) cite an 8 percent to
30 percent range.

10For example, Bloomberg New Energy Finance (2024) reports a
30 percent cost gap between China and Europe/US for EV batteries.
Regarding historical examples of early-stage industry protection,
Luzio and Greenstein (1995) report a 45 percent cost gap between
Brazil and the US in microcomputers in the 1980s; Head (1994)
reports a 25 percent cost gap between the US and the United Kingdom in the late 1880s in tinplate.
11The analysis uses a fivefold advantage as a midpoint, which is
comparable to key examples. For example, in the production of solar
panels, China’s cumulative experience is about 8–12 times that of the
EU and US, while for wind energy equipment, China’s cumulative
experience is 2–3 times larger (see Online Annex Figure 3.2.3).
12The simulations are shown for an industrial policy that consists
of a 10 percent tariff and a 12 percent production subsidy imposed
by the home country. The industrial policy is financed through
lump-sum taxation.

Industrial Policy for Infant Industry
Protection

80

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Figure 3.5. Intertemporal Trade-Oﬀs Depend on
Learning Rate

Figure 3.6. Key Sector Characteristics Determine the
Long-Term Eﬀects of Industrial Policy

(Baseline in period 1 = 1; time on x-axis)
1.1 1. Production Costs

(Relative change, baseline in period 1 normalized to 1)

Home with IP
Home with no IP
Foreign

1.0
0.9

Home with IP
1.0 1. Relative Costs

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.5
0.4

1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

12

Baseline—IP
Baseline—no IP

10

0.2
0

14 2. Domestic Production Volumes

12

6

10

4

8

2

6
1

3

5

7

Baseline

Farther from
frontier

Slow learning

Smaller market
size

14 2. Relative Increase in Production Volumes

8

0

Foreign with home IP

9

11

13

1.1 3. Infant Industry Consumer Prices

15

17

19

2
0

Baseline—IP
Baseline—no IP

1.0

4

0.9

Baseline

Farther from
frontier

Slow learning

Smaller market
size

0.70 3. Relative Infant Industry Consumer Prices

0.8
0.65

0.7
0.6
0.5

0.60
1

3

5

7

9

11

13

15

17

19

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: This figure is a stylized model illustration. Period 1 simulates model outcomes
for one period assuming no IPs. Thus, period 1 outcomes are identical across both
scenarios. IP scenario assumes that home economy imposes trade protections and
production subsidies (12 percent production subsidy and 10 percent tariff) in period 2
and onward. The “no IP” scenario assumes that no IPs are in place from period 1
onward. The learning rate is 19 percent. Normalizations in period 1 are as follows:
production costs, production volumes, and consumer prices are each normalized to 1.
IP = industrial policy.

0.55
0.50

Baseline

Farther from
frontier

Slow learning

Smaller market
size

Source: IMF staff calculations.
Note: Bar charts show relative change in costs, production volumes, and consumer
prices in period 20 relative to period 1. Each scenario has 12 percent production
subsidy and 10 percent tariff. The baseline learning rate is 19 percent, and the baseline
cost advantage of the foreign country is 30 percent. In “farther from the frontier”
scenario, the foreign country has a 40 percent cost advantage. In the “slow learning
rate” scenario, the home learning rate is assumed half as large, and in the “smaller
market size” scenario the home country is assumed to have no access to exports. Red
squares in panel 1 indicate the relative cost decline in the foreign country in period 20
relative to period 1 if the home country imposes IP. IP = industrial policy.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

81

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

if the home country either (1) starts farther from the
global frontier, (2) experiences a slower learning rate,
or (3) faces a smaller market—for example, because it
does not have access to export markets.13
When IP is conducted further behind the frontier,14
home production costs decline more slowly as production quantities increase only 3.5 times over the long
term. Hence, there is less domestic learning by doing.
Instead, the home country continues to rely primarily
on imports, even as their prices rise because of trade
protections. Since domestic production costs fall more
slowly, consumer prices decline less over time.
Public support may not deliver the intended effects
if domestic producers cannot learn as fast as anticipated. For example, learning could be slower if shortages of skilled labor limit improvements to production
processes or if barriers to the diffusion of foreign
knowledge slow technology adoption (Eugster and
others 2022). If learning in the home country happens
only half as fast as in the foreign country, domestic
costs decline more slowly than in the foreign country
as production volumes increase. Consequently, instead
of catching up to frontier production costs, domestic costs diverge further relative to the technology
frontier—remaining 80 percent higher over the long
term. Domestic production volumes do not ramp up
over time, and consumer prices stay higher for much
longer. Hence, domestic consumption also remains
more subdued than in the baseline.
Market size is key for industrial policy to deliver
production cost declines through learning by doing. In
the last counterfactual, the home country is assumed
to lack access to export markets. The effectively limited
market size now constrains the expansion of domestic
production volumes. There is less learning by doing,
with production increasing by only about one-third of
the increase in the baseline scenario and production
costs declining more slowly.
13Figure 3.6. shows endpoints after 20 years. The full dynamic
paths are in Online Annex Figures 3.3.1.–3.3.4.
14The literature has discussed the possibility that a country far
behind the global frontier may be able to leapfrog the current
technological leader (Brezis and others 1991; Lee and Lim 2001;
Aghion, Akcigit, and Howitt 2015; Stiglitz 2017). For example, a
country might skip a particular technology altogether by moving to
deploy mobile phones widely rather than first investing in landline
infrastructure. The stylized model in this section focuses on a single
technology and does not capture such leapfrogging. However, Online
Annex Figure 3.3.1 investigates how countries could get closer to
the frontier from the start in a given technology—for instance, by
attracting foreign direct investment or technology transfers from the
technological leader. In that case, by starting closer to the frontier,
the home country could not only catch up to the global frontier but
surpass the incumbent technological leader over time.

82

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Finally, it should be noted that the exercise abstracts
from the vital complementary role that non-targeted
structural policies can play in enhancing productivity.
Box 3.3 provides further analysis.

Lessons from Key Industrial Policies,
Past and Present
The stylized model of the previous section helped
illustrate the dynamic role of IP at the sectoral level and
showed how its efficacy is sensitive to many factors.
This section seeks to enrich that analysis with greater
realism by exploring two key applications. First, a more
detailed scenario analysis of energy-security-related
IP in Europe, aimed at onshoring clean technology
production, is used to illustrate potential trade-offs.
Second, two prominent historical cases—Brazil and
Korea in the 1970s—are revisited for more granular
insights into the appropriate design and implementation of IP and other complementary policies.

Industrial Policy, the Power Sector, and Energy
Security
Many countries are seeking to enhance energy
security by transitioning to renewable energy and
electrifying key sectors such as transportation. This
would entail widespread adoption of clean technology
equipment, much of which is currently produced in
the cost leader, China.15 IP has been proposed as a
way to reshore electric vehicles and renewable power
equipment production in the EU and other advanced
economies, as these industries are at the infant industry
stage. Manufacturing these technologies domestically would increase self-reliance in a critical sector
while providing job opportunities. But what are the
trade-offs?
To quantify possible trade-offs in the case of the
European Union, an extended version of the infant
industry model of the previous section is calibrated
to clean technology data. It is then augmented with
the Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy
Transition (GMMET), a dynamic global model with
a granular energy sector representation, to simulate
the path of clean technology adoption and sectoral
outcomes between 2024 and 2035.16
15The literature emphasizes the role of learning-by-doing dynamics in these clean technology industries (see, for example, Bai and
others 2020 and Barwick and others 2025).
16See Online Annex 3.4 for details on the extended version of the
model and its calibration.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Figure 3.7. Decomposition of EU Electric Vehicle Price Decline
(Percent change between 2024 and 2035)
10

Domestic learning
Tariffs

Foreign learning
Subsidies

Import share
Total price

Baseline

No IP

Reshoring

0
−10
−20
−30
−40
−50
−60

Sources: Bloomberg New Energy Finance; International Renewable Energy Agency; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The figure shows illustrative price change for electric vehicles in the EU under
business as usual, and two hypothetical scenarios, derived by a four-country version
of the infant industry model, calibrated to current policies, production, and trade
patterns of clean technologies. Under baseline scenario, the EU maintains status
quo IPs. Under no-IP scenario, all IPs are removed starting in 2025. Under reshoring
scenario, a 15 percent production subsidy is introduced in addition to status quo
trade protections. EU = European Union; IP = industrial policy.

The model is run under three policy scenarios.
• A baseline scenario assumes continuation of industrial policy settings observed in 2024.
• A no industrial policy (no-IP) scenario assumes the
removal of all existing tariffs and subsidies in the
clean tech sector.
• A reshoring scenario assumes that major advanced
economies increase production subsidies to onshore
manufacturing.
Prices, adoption, and onshoring. Learning-by-doing
generates a substantial decline in the price of clean
technologies in the next decade in the EU, but with
varying magnitudes under the three policy scenarios
(Figure 3.7). Both the no-IP scenario and the reshoring
scenario result in sharper price declines than existing baseline policies. The additional price declines
under the no-IP scenario are driven by the removal of
existing tariffs, which leads to an increase in low-cost
imports. By contrast, if policies observed at the start
of the simulation period are maintained (the baseline
scenario), the main driver of the decline in prices is
the reduction in production costs of domestic firms,
which increase production volumes and benefit from
learning by doing. These effects are further amplified domestically under the onshoring scenario, as
larger subsidies drive a greater increase in production

volumes domestically. However, even as domestic production costs decline substantially, they remain higher
than those of the technology leader, which continue to
improve over time.17
Across policy scenarios, the decline in clean technology prices drives uptake (Figure 3.8, panels 1 and 2),
particularly under the no-IP and reshoring scenarios,
under which price declines are steepest.
A key distinction between scenarios lies in the
degree of onshoring of clean technology equipment
manufacturing (Figure 3.8, panel 3). Under the
baseline, Europe loses domestic market share, as its
relatively small market limits the scope for catch-up
learning. In the no-IP scenario, the removal of tariffs
leads to domestic producers being outcompeted by
lower-cost imports. In the reshoring scenario, Europe
achieves substantial self-reliance through a combination of subsidies and cumulative learning effects.
Energy security and macroeconomic effects. The
increased penetration of clean technologies leads to a
substantial reduction in fossil fuel use in power production and transportation in both the reshoring and
no-IP scenarios relative to the baseline.18 Both policy
paths enhance energy security and reduce fossil fuel
dependence in the EU (Figure 3.9, panel 1).
But key trade-offs arise as the two scenarios have
very different impacts on the labor market and fiscal
spending (Figure 3.9, panels 2 and 3). The no-IP
scenario eliminates the subsidies present in the baseline but leads to a reduction of employment in clean
technology manufacturing of more than 0.5 percent
of the labor force as imports dominate. On the other
hand, the reshoring scenario results in a reallocation
of labor toward clean technology manufacturing,
equivalent to more than 1 percent of the labor force.
However, these gains are offset by declines in other
manufacturing sectors, in part driven by exchange rate
movements.
In addition, reshoring entails substantial fiscal
costs—estimated at 0.4 percent of EU GDP annually,
17The model captures the effects of learning by doing on the
production cost of clean technologies. In practice, other factors
could lead to divergence in these costs across regions, including
access to low-cost inputs, such as critical minerals. Recent literature
has demonstrated that a fragmentation of global commodity markets
could lead to substantial increases in the price of critical minerals in
the EU (Chapter 3 of the October 2023 World Economic Outlook
and Alvarez and others 2025).
18By 2035, oil use in passenger transportation declines by 20 to
30 percent relative to the baseline scenario, and coal use in power
generation also falls. However, gas use increases because electricity
demand is higher and a firming up of capacity is needed to support
renewables.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

83

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 3.8. No-IP and Reshoring Policies Accelerate Take-Up,
but Domestic Production Impacts Diﬀer
2035

20 1. European Fuel Use in 2035
(Deviation from baseline, percent)
10

2024

70 1. European EV Shares
(Percent of passenger fleet)
60

0

50

−10

40

−20

30

−40

10
Baseline

No IP

Reshoring

46 2. European Renewable Generation Excluding Hydroelectric
(Percent of generation)
44
42

Coal use in electricity

Oil use in transportation

1.5
1.0
0.5
0

38

−0.5

36

−1.0

No IP

30

90 3. European Subsidy Cost
(2025–35, annual average, billion euros)
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

15

0

Baseline

No IP

Reshoring

90 3. European Clean Tech Production
(Percent of domestic use)
75
60
45

0

Gas use in electricity

2.5 2. European Clean Tech Labor in 2035
(Deviation from baseline, percent of labor market)
2.0

40

34

No IP
Reshoring

−30

20
0

Figure 3.9. Policy Options to Reduce Fossil Fuel Use through
Access to Cheaper Clean Technologies Present Trade-Oﬀs

Baseline

No IP

Reshoring

Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Under the baseline scenario, the EU continues to impose status quo industrial
policies. Under the no-IP scenario, all industrial policies are removed starting in 2025.
Under the reshoring scenario, 15 percent electric vehicle and 30 percent renewable
production subsidies are introduced starting in 2025. See Online Annex 3.4 for details.
EV = electric vehicle; IP = industrial policy.

84

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

No IP

Reshoring

Reshoring

Sources: Global Macroeconomic Model for the Energy Transition; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: Under the baseline scenario, the EU continues to impose status quo industrial
policies. Under the no-IP scenario, all industrial policies are removed starting in 2025.
Under the reshoring scenario, 15 percent electric vehicle and 30 percent renewable
production subsidies are introduced starting in 2025. In panel 3, the European subsidy
cost under the no-IP scenario is zero. See Online Annex 3.4 for details. IP = industrial
policy.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

or approximately €80 billion in annual subsidies,
on average, from 2025 to 2035, equivalent to about
€30,000 per job created in the sector. These would
amount to close to half of today’s EU budget and
exceed current agricultural subsidies.19
Overall, IP could allow Europe to achieve
self-reliance in clean technology manufacturing and
could protect jobs in the sector, but it would entail
large fiscal costs. However, these model results are sensitive to key assumptions. For example, the simulations
assume Europe achieves learning rates comparable to
those observed in China over the past decade. But this
is not guaranteed, and any deviation from this assumption, such as a slower learning rate, would worsen
the identified trade-offs, as described in the previous
section. Indeed, history shows that IP does not always
deliver as intended, as is discussed next.

Historical Case Studies
The stylized model of sectoral industry dynamics
suggests that key parameters such as domestic learning
rates and market size are important factors to consider for IP. But how have such parameters shaped IP
outcomes in practice? And what part do policy design,
implementation, and complementary policies play in
determining the success of IP?
To shed light on these questions, this section examines two prominent and well-documented historical
cases in emerging markets: Brazil and Korea.20 During
the 1970s, the two countries adopted large-scale
industrial policies using instruments that resemble
those documented in modern industrial strategies, with
the aim of promoting structural transformation in
selected strategic sectors (Online Annex 3.5). However,
their approaches differed markedly. Brazil emphasized
mainly import-substituting industrialization and relied
on state-owned enterprises as the primary implementation vehicle, whereas Korea pursued an export-oriented
model based on large private business conglomerates

19In principle, these could be financed by the potential revenues
from EU carbon pricing over the coming years (Carton and others,
forthcoming), which are not modeled in the exercise. If financed
through an increase in debt-to-GDP ratios, these subsidies could
lead to an initial slight increase in GDP, which later would be offset
by a slowdown in activity when debt-to-GDP ratios need to be
brought back down (see Online Annex 3.4.5).
20Of course, care should be taken in extrapolating lessons from
historical case studies; there are many differences today from the
1970s, including the geopolitical context, trade relations, and global
technology.

(chaebols).21 Korea’s experience is broadly regarded as
more successful—see Ocampo and Porcile (2020) for a
comparative perspective, as reflected in higher growth
rates of manufacturing value added and real GDP
over the period (Online Annex Figure 3.5.1). Recent
empirical studies of Korea’s experience provide causal
evidence that IP promoted the expansion of targeted
industries, boosted their international competitiveness,
and generated positive spillovers to other sectors (Choi
and Shim 2024a; Lane 2025). Further analyses show
that subsidized firms continued to grow faster than
those never subsidized for up to 30 years after the
subsidies ended (Choi and Levchenko 2024). However,
the literature also contains some dissenting views.22
Policy design. A comparison of the two countries’
experiences reveals the crucial role played by good policy design, elements of which include fostering domestic learning by doing, targeting a sufficiently large
market to allow firms to reach an efficient scale of production, and directing support toward areas with high
potential returns or positive externalities. In Korea,
deliberate policies emphasized experiential learning on
the factory floor. Chaebols relied on salaried engineers over administrators at the plant level to absorb
foreign technologies and build domestic capabilities. In
contrast, Brazil ’s IPs were implemented through stateowned enterprises and lacked the private sector engagement that was central to Korea’s learning-by-doing
model (Peres and Primi 2019). The outward-oriented
strategy in Korea also enabled chaebols to access global
markets and benefit from scale economies, whereas
21The motivations behind IP in Korea and Brazil also diverged
(Ayres and others 2019; De Bolle, Cohen-Setton, and Sarsenbayev
2025; Lane 2025). In Korea, IP was considered essential for military
and industrial modernization, as well as for long-term development—in Brazil, a key objective following the 1973 oil crisis was
to reduce dependence on oil imports by investing in domestic oil
production and alternative energy sources.
22For instance, Kim, Lee, and Shin (2021) argue that IPs in
Korea increased resource misallocation. For Brazil, some commentators are more positive about the country’s IP experience.
Recent papers suggest that IP may have benefited some sectors
that could gain access to large export markets, noting that public
support—including the development of an ecosystem of educational
and R&D institutions—contributed to Embraer’s success in the
aeronautics sector as well as to innovation and productivity gains in
agriculture (Sabel and others 2012; Veiga and Rios 2019). Indeed,
Rodrik (1993) shows that some export incentives introduced under
the 1972 Benefícios Fiscais a Programas Especiais de Exportação
(BEFIEX) program were effective in boosting Brazil’s exports by
multinational firms, even though these firms sometimes had to
adjust their global strategies by reducing exports to third countries.
More recently, Akerman and others (2025) show that public R&D
investment significantly increased Brazil’s agricultural output, driven
by both higher productivity and expanded input use.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

85

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

in Brazil, import-substitution confined state-owned
enterprises to a limited domestic market, constraining
their ability to scale up production volumes. In Korea,
support was directed toward sectors considered critical
for military and industrial modernization and technologically within reach, drawing lessons from Japan’s
1958–68 development experience.
Implementation. The two cases underscore the
importance of careful implementation, including
fostering competition, relying on competent implementing agencies and objective benchmark criteria
to evaluate success or failure, and incorporating
safeguards—such as sunset clauses—to limit the costs
of policy failures. In contrast to the limited competition faced by Brazil’s state-owned-enterprises, domestic
and international competition were central to Korea’s
approach, helping to ensure market discipline. For
example, the government supported multiple firms
within sectors and allowed market forces to determine
the winners. This approach was evident in the early
stages of the automotive industry, when numerous
entrants initially competed and benefited from state
support, before Hyundai emerged as the dominant
firm.23 IP governance was also institutionalized in
Korea. Monthly export promotion meetings—chaired
by senior officials and involving representatives from
academia, finance, and industry—provided a structured forum for oversight and performance review.
Export targets served not only as benchmarks for
allocating state resources but also as de facto sunset
clauses: firms that failed to meet targets risked losing access to state support, regardless of their size or
political influence. Brazil, by contrast, lacked an IP
governance framework and safeguards comparable to
Korea’s.
Complementary policies. Finally, the cases demonstrate the vital enabling role of structural reforms (see
also Box 3.3) and macroeconomic stability. In Korea,
an anti-corruption campaign launched prior to its
industrial policy drive helped to signal that all chaebols
were subject to the rule of law. During its industrial
push, the government invested in industrial parks
and facilitated imports of essential raw materials and
capital goods to support domestic production. It also
strengthened the education system to meet the growing
demand for skilled engineers and production workers.
23In an advanced economy context, the case of Airbus offers
another example of how competition-enhancing industrial policy can
succeed in reducing costs in commercial jet manufacturing, boosting
R&D and building a pan-European supply chain (Hodge and others
2024).

86

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

In Korea, land reforms preceded IP, unlike in Brazil
(de Bolle, Cohen-Setton, and Sarsenbayev 2025).
Moreover, in Brazil, a fragmented budgeting process,
high reliance on external borrowing, and persistent
macroeconomic instability—including periods of
overvalued exchange rates and accelerating inflation—
ultimately culminated in the 1980s external debt crisis
and eroded the effectiveness of the country’s strategy.

Industrial Policy and Sector Performance
This section estimates the link between IPs and
economic performance, both in the targeted sector and
in cross-sectoral spillovers via input-output linkages.24
Industrial policies and targeted sector performance.
Economic performance improves in targeted sectors,
though the magnitudes are small.25 As shown in
Figure 3.10, panel 1, direct support IPs are found to
improve value added, productivity, and the allocation
of resources across firms within industries (allocative
efficiency) in line with previous findings (Baquie and
others 2025). For subsidized financing, point estimates
go in the same direction, but the results are not significant. In terms of magnitudes, one additional direct
support measure is associated with about 0.5 percent
higher value added and 0.3 percent higher total factor
productivity (TFP) in the targeted sector three years
after implementation.26 These magnitudes are rela24The analysis rests on a local projection method following Baquie
and others (2025). It covers 58 countries (including 31 advanced
economies) and 732 NACE Revision 2 (4-digit) sectors from 2009
to 2021. The key regressor is the change in the stock of subsidized
financing and direct support IPs in a given sector, country, and year,
identified by applying the Juhász and others (2022, 2025) algorithm
to the Global Trade Alert (GTA) database. Results are broadly consistent with the use of alternative algorithms that categorize IP using
the GTA database in the recently developed NIPO database.
25Online Annex 3.6 reports the local projection coefficients for
all time horizons before and after the implementation of IPs, thus
specifying the full dynamic path. The chapter focuses on the two
most prevalent instruments of industrial policy while recognizing
that other measures not in the database could also have important
economic effects. The main outcome variables, constructed using
Orbis data, are sectoral value added, sectoral productivity, and within-sector allocative efficiency, following Hsieh and Klenow (2009).
Despite the inclusion of a wide range of fixed effects and controls,
a causal analysis is challenged by the endogenous implementation of
IPs. For this reason, the results in this section are presented as associations. See Online Annex 3.6 for information on the number of
observations for each country, a full description of the methodology,
and a summary table with the key findings in this section.
26A new subsidized financing measure (direct support measure)
is found for about 12 (6) percent of country-industry observations.
Countries that implement new industrial policies implement on
average 1.8 (2.0) new subsidized financing (direct support) measures
at a time.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Figure 3.10. Industrial Policies and Medium-Term
Performance of Targeted Sectors
(Percent)

Subsidized financing

Direct support

4 1. AEs and EMDEs
3
2
1
0
−1
−2

All

AEs EMDEs
Value added

All

AEs
TFP

EMDEs

All
AEs EMDEs
Allocative eﬃciency

Mature

Infant
Mature
Allocative eﬃciency

1.5 2. Infant and Mature Industries
1.0
0.5
0
−0.5
−1.0
−1.5
−2.0
−2.5

Infant
Mature
Value added

Infant

TFP

Sources: Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; Orbis; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The figure estimates the impact of industrial policies (IPs) using the local
projection method. The dependent variables are the log difference in sectoral value
added, TFP, or allocative efficiency three years after policy implementation. The
key right-hand-side variables are the change in the number of subsidized financing
and direct support IPs targeting the sector. Regional coefficients are estimated by
interacting IPs with a dummy for AEs or EMDEs. Infant/mature industry coefficients
are estimated by interacting IPs with a dummy for each industry being infant/mature.
In each country, infant industries are industries with above-average share of young
and leveraged firms and above-average distance to the world productivity frontier.
All specifications control for one lag of dependent and independent variables and
include country-sector, country-year, and sector-year fixed effects. Whiskers represent
90 percent confidence intervals. See Online Annex Table 3.6.2 for further details on
the data underlying each bar. AEs = advanced economies; EMDEs = emerging market
and developing economies; TFP = total factor productivity.

tively small, as industry value added grows on average
6.5 percent and TFP grows about 4 percent per year in
the sample. These results reflect higher capital accumulation and employment in the aftermath of subsidy
industrial policies (see Online Annex 3.6).
Two findings emerge when investigating whether the
relation between IPs and economic performance differs
by countries’ income level (Figure 3.10, panel 1).
First, direct support is associated with medium-term
improvements in value added, productivity, and

allocative efficiency in advanced economies, but not in
emerging market and developing economies. Second,
subsidized financing is associated with a reduction in
allocative efficiency in emerging markets—although
this is not significant. One additional direct support
measure is associated with a 0.3 percent increase in
allocative efficiency in advanced economies, whereas
one additional subsidized financing measure is associated with a 0.5 percent decrease in allocative efficiency
in emerging market and developing economies (as
discussed in greater depth for China in Box 3.1).
These findings may reflect the role of complementary
horizontal policies, such as reforms to improve governance quality and institutional capacity (Box 3.3), or
differences in education, which have been found to be
key complements to IPs (Deléchat and others 2024).
They may also reflect temporary increases in misallocation as governments incentivize initially small and
unproductive firms to scale up production and learn by
doing (Kim, Lee, and Shin 2021; Choi and Levchenko
2024). Next, the sample is split into infant and mature
industries (Figure 3.10, panel 2).27 This exercise
identifies infant industries as industries with a large
share of young and financially constrained firms that
are relatively close to the world productivity frontier.
Direct support appears to have a similar impact across
sectors. But subsidized financing appears to benefit
only infant industries: The estimates suggest that one
additional financial subsidy is linked to a 0.5 percent
increase in the value added of infant industries and a
1.2 percent decrease for mature industries three years
after the shock. These findings are likely to reflect the
importance of financial frictions for the capital accumulation of young and productive firms and industries
(Machado Parente and others 2025).
Industrial policies in the energy sector and downstream
sector performance. A large share of IPs target energy
sectors and can potentially spill over to the rest of
the economy because energy is a key factor of production. Estimates suggest that one additional direct
support measure is associated with 0.7 percent higher
27These results build on investigation by Baquie and others (2025)
of the relationship between industrial policy and targeted sector
outcomes along several different sector-specific and firm-specific
dimensions. They find, individually, a stronger association between
industrial policy and economic outcomes in young firms, as well as
in more financially constrained firms. Moreover, they find a stronger
association between industrial policy and sectoral value added in sectors with high markups and high external dependence (such as ship
building and pharmaceutical products) relative to sectors with low
markups and low external dependence (for instance, manufacturing
of nonelectric domestic appliances).

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

87

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Figure 3.11. Downstream Impact of Energy Sector Industrial
Policy
(Percent)

the general equilibrium effects of IP differing considerably from its sectoral effects. This is investigated in the
next section.

6

Cross-Sector Spillovers and Aggregate
Effects

4
2.52

2.24

2
0

−0.49

−2

Value added
Allocative eﬃciency

−4
−3

−2

−1

−1.75

0
Horizon

1

2

3

Sources: Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; Orbis; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The figure estimates the impact of industrial policies (IPs) using the local
projection method. The dependent variables are the log difference in value added
and allocative efficiency over the specified horizon. 0 = the short-term horizon
corresponding to when industrial policies are introduced; see Online Annex 3.6 for
details. The key independent variable is the change in the number of direct support
IPs in upstream energy sectors. All specifications control for one lag of dependent
and independent variables, for IPs implemented in downstream sectors, and include
country-sector, country-year, and sector-year fixed effects. Shaded areas represent
90 percent confidence intervals, and numbers report point estimates.

TFP in the targeted energy sector within a year of
policy implementation (Online Annex Figure 3.6.5,
panel 1). These productivity improvements spill over
to downstream sectors over time as producers purchase energy from more productive suppliers. One
additional direct support measure to energy sectors
is linked to a 2.5 percent increase in value added for
downstream sectors one to three years after the shock
(Figure 3.11).28 However, the measure is also linked to
a temporary 1.7 percent decrease in allocative efficiency in downstream sectors. These findings could
reflect differences across firms in energy cost shares,
suggesting that firms benefiting the most from lower
energy prices are not necessarily the most productive
(Aterido, Iootty, and Melecky 2025; Fontagné, Martin,
and Orefice 2024).
Beyond the impact of IP on targeted sectors, there
is the wider question of its impact on the overall economy. Cross-sector linkages and spillovers can result in
28This analysis focuses on spillovers of IPs targeted at energy sectors while keeping trade barriers and other policies constant in that
sector. Before implementation, industries that receive IP and those
that do not, do not differ statistically in their outcomes.

88

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

To study the cross-sector spillovers and aggregate
effects of industrial policies, a quantitative trade model
is used (similar to Hodge and others 2024; Ju and
others 2024; Lashkaripour and Lugovskyy 2023; and
Rotunno and Ruta 2025). The model features labor as
the only factor of production and 20 granular sectors
with input linkages between sectors and countries.
External economies of scale at the sector level that are
not internalized by firms when making production
and hiring decisions create a rationale for IP. In the
scenarios under consideration, all advanced economies
conduct industrial policy, and the focus is on domestic
outcomes in that block of countries.
IP in one sector: energy. The first scenario focuses
on the cross-sectoral effects of IP in the energy
sector.29 Implementing externality-correcting subsidies in the energy sector leads output in the sector to
rise by more than 50 percent as employment ramps
up.30 Since industries in this sector feature increasing
returns to scale, sectoral TFP rises by almost 3 percent
(Figure 3.12, panel 1). However, growth in employment draws workers from non-energy sectors. As some
of the untargeted sectors have increasing returns to
scale, this labor reallocation reduces their TFP.31
In aggregate, higher TFP in the energy sector and
lower TFP in non-energy sectors result in a small
drop in economy-wide TFP. This is because the
energy sector (as a whole) does not have the highest returns to scale in the calibration. Moreover, the
29Whereas the focus in Figures 3.7 and 3.8 was on IP in the clean

technology sector in the EU, here the scope is much broader and
includes energy commodity mining (ISIC sector B05–06), coke
and petroleum refining (ISIC sector C19), and electrical equipment
(ISIC sector C27). Thus, it captures both the extraction and processing of energy commodities and the capital goods used by the energy
sector. See Online Annex 3.7 for details of an exercise that limits the
scope of IP to clean technology.
30Sector-specific scale-elasticity parameters are calibrated based on
estimates from Bartelme and others (2025). Sectoral subsidy rates
are chosen to correct distortions associated with external economies
of scale in the energy sector (Ju and others 2024; Lashkaripour and
Lugovskyy 2023).
31Across non-energy sectors, those with a high input share of
energy tend to benefit from energy IP, whereas the output contraction in non-energy sectors is concentrated in those with low energy
shares, notably services.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Figure 3.12. Sectoral and Aggregate Effects of Industrial
Policy in the Energy Sector

Figure 3.13. Sectoral Effects and Aggregate Effects of
Optimal and Uniform Industrial Policy

80 1. Sectoral Effects on Targeted and Untargeted Sectors
(Percent)
Targeted sectors
60
Untargeted sectors, right scale

8

40

4

20

2

0

0

−20

Sectoral output shares

TFP

6

Employment

0.4 2. Aggregate Effects
(Percentage points, unless noted otherwise)
0.2

30 1. Sectoral Effects on Targeted and Untargeted Sectors
(Percent)
20
10
0

−2

−10

4

6 2. Aggregate Effects

2

5
4

0

0

−0.2

−2

−0.4

−4

−0.6

−6

0

−8

−1

−0.8

Aggregate TFP change

Energy import share,
right scale

Size of subsidies
(percent of GDP),
right scale

Sources: Global Trade Alert; Market Access Map; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Inter-Country Input-Output tables and Trade in
Value-Added indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows changes in outcomes in energy industrial policy (IP) scenario
relative to the status quo baseline from estimates of quantitative trade model. Energy
IP scenario simulates introduction of optimal subsidies in the energy sector. IPs are
introduced for the AEs in the sample (Australia, Canada, EU, Iceland, Israel, Japan,
Korea, New Zealand, Norway, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States), and results
are reported as weighted average effect across all AEs, unless noted otherwise. Weights
are shares in total output by AEs. Targeted energy sectors are “energy mining,” “coke
and petroleum refining,” and “electrical equipment.” IPs in all other sectors (untargeted
sectors) remain unchanged. Panel 1 reports percentage change in sectoral output,
TFP, and employment calculated as the weighted sum across targeted and untargeted
sectors. Panel 2 reports percentage changes in aggregate TFP. Subsidy costs are
reported as change relative to the status quo baseline. AEs = advanced economies; TFP
= total factor productivity.

fiscal cost of the IP is steep, at an annual expenditure
of 1.8 percent of GDP in the new long-run steady
state. At the same time, energy imports as a share
of energy consumption fall by 5.1 percentage points
(Figure 3.12, panel 2). Thus, there is a trade-off
between greater energy self-reliance on the one hand
and falling aggregate efficiency and larger public
expenditure on the other.
Well-targeted IP across sectors. The previous scenario
featured a decline in aggregate productivity because
resources were withdrawn in many non-energy sectors
with increasing returns to scale. The next scenario

Targeted sectors
Untargeted sectors

Sectoral output shares

TFP

Employment

Targeted subsidies
Uniform subsidies

3
2
1

Aggregate TFP change
(percentage points)

Size of subsidies
(percent of GDP)

Sources: Global Trade Alert; Market Access Map; Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Inter-Country Input-Output tables and Trade in
Value-Added indicators; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Figure shows changes in heterogeneous industrial policy (IP) scenario relative
to the status quo baseline from estimates of quantitative trade model. Heterogeneous
IP scenario simulates introduction of optimal subsidies in all sectors with increasing
returns to scale, that is, manufacturing sectors. IPs are introduced for the AEs in the
sample (Australia, Canada, EU, Iceland, Israel, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Norway,
Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States), and results are reported as weighted
average effect across all AEs, unless noted otherwise. Weights are shares in total output
by AEs. Panel 1 reports percentage change in sectoral output, TFP, and employment
calculated as the weighted sum across targeted and untargeted sectors. Panel 2 reports
percentage changes in aggregate TFP. Subsidy costs are reported as change relative to
the status quo baseline. AEs = advanced economies; TFP = total factor productivity.

simulates a broader IP strategy, with subsidies rolled
out for every sector of the economy with increasing
returns to scale. Major advanced economies implement “optimal” IP—with subsidies increasing in a
sector’s returns to scale.32 In this scenario, output
and employment rise sizably in the targeted sectors
(Figure 3.13, panel 1). This leads to aggregate TFP
gains due to the expansion in sectors with increasing returns to scale. However, achieving these results
requires fiscal resources of close to 5.5 percent of
32It should be noted that this model does not incorporate strategic
competition between countries or retaliatory cycles, which could in
principle drive a “race to the bottom” and erode global benefits from
returns to scale.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

89

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

GDP annually, targeted with great precision to correct
scale externalities across all sectors, a high bar.33
Moreover, even with precise targeting, the effects may
be smaller in practice because of implementation challenges and the overall business and macroeconomic
environment, as seen in this chapter’s case studies.
Mistargeted IP. In practice, governments may lack
accurate information about returns to scale or be
subject to capture by special interests. A final scenario
evaluates the effects of IP when subsidies are not
optimally targeted. Specifically, subsidies are increased
uniformly across all sectors, irrespective of whether
they present increasing returns to scale. The aggregate
fiscal envelope is held constant relative to the previous scenario with perfect targeting. In this scenario,
aggregate productivity declines slightly despite the
large fiscal cost of 5.5 percent of GDP (Figure 3.13,
panel 2). Whereas productivity improves in some
sectors with increasing returns to scale, it declines in
other sectors, leading to a slight decrease in aggregate
productivity. This illustrates that the precise identification and targeting of sectors with increasing returns to
scale is critical for IP to achieve aggregate gains.

Conclusions and Policy Implications
Industrial policy has returned to the center of the
policy debate. If well designed and targeted to address
production-side market failures, it can improve economic outcomes at sectoral and aggregate levels. The
experience of countries such as Korea illustrates that
carefully crafted subsidies, aligned with clear objectives
and implemented within a sound institutional framework, can catalyze structural transformation.
However, the risks that IP may not deliver economic
gains are significant. Effectiveness is highly sensitive
to conditions that are difficult to assess ex ante—such
33Despite the large fiscal costs, fiscal multipliers are higher than 1
in the simulations. It is also important to note that in this scenario,
all sectors with increasing returns to scale receive subsidies that fully
correct the externality, which would require a subsidy proportional
to the returns-to-scale parameters for each sector. Thus, in such
models, the size of the needed subsidies depends on calibration of
the returns-to-scale parameter (as discussed in Lashkaripour and
Lugovskyy 2023; Bartelme and others 2025; and Ju and others
2024). In addition, the quantitative trade model has a simplified
fiscal sector with tariff revenue lump-sum rebates to households
and subsidies financed via lump-sum taxation. This abstracts from
distortionary taxation, other types of government spending, and
dynamic fiscal effects.

90

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

as the extent of learning by doing, proximity to the
technological frontier, and market size. Even when
well targeted, interventions can be fiscally costly.
For instance, a clean technology subsidy in the EU
sufficient to onshore a significant share of production
could cost about 0.4 percent of annual GDP, close to
half of the EU budget. Poorly targeted policies risk
wasting scarce fiscal resources without delivering meaningful returns. Country-specific circumstances matter,
and the successful implementation of industrial policy
rests on strong institutional capacity and good governance, constraints that may be particularly relevant in
emerging market and developing economies. The role
of complementary structural reforms that do not target
particular firms or sectors but aim to improve the
general business environment is vital.
Moreover, even when delivering sectoral improvements, IP entails important trade-offs. Cross-sectoral
spillovers can be negative, undermining aggregate
productivity even as targeted sectors expand. And
even though they are not the focus of this chapter, adverse cross-country spillovers and retaliatory
cycles are likely to further reduce net benefits from
domestic IP. Policies that enhance resilience—such
as onshoring—may come at the cost of efficiency,
including higher consumer prices during the transition. And spillovers can have mixed effects across
dimensions: for example, energy sector IP may
enhance energy security and raise value added in
downstream industries while drawing resources away
from more productive sectors, reducing allocative
efficiency.
These findings underscore the importance of careful
policy design and implementation. Governments
should be mindful of the risks of wasteful spending, especially when debt is elevated and fiscal space
limited. They should weigh the opportunity cost of IP
against potentially more efficient horizontal policies.
And they should recognize and manage trade-offs
explicitly. If IP is pursued, it should be grounded in
clear diagnostics of market failures, include mechanisms for regular evaluation and recalibration, and be
embedded within a strong institutional and macroeconomic framework. Market discipline should be encouraged through vigorous domestic and international
competition. Doing so will increase the likelihood that
IP delivers on its promise—without compromising
fiscal sustainability or economic efficiency.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Box 3.1. Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on Misallocation
China has long used various industrial policy tools
to support priority economic sectors, including (but
not limited to) cash subsidies, tax benefits, subsidized
credit, subsidized land, and trade and regulatory barriers that benefit incumbent firms (State Council 2005).
This has had a material impact on the economy,
helping to develop specific industries and technologies.
However, it has also generated fiscal costs and potential factor misallocation.
Based on financial reports of listed firms and the
registry of land transactions, Garcia-Macia, Kothari,
and Tao (2025) estimate the equivalent fiscal cost of
industrial policy in China to be about 4 percent of
GDP between 2011 and 2023 (Figure 3.1.1). Cash
subsidies were the costliest instrument, followed by
tax benefits (which have grown since the pandemic),
land subsidies, and subsidized credit. Most of this
support was directed to the manufacturing sector, with
industries like semiconductors, high-tech manufacturing, and automobiles benefiting especially from cash
subsidies and tax benefits.
While the strategic direction of industrial policy in
China is set by the central government in five-year
plans (for example, State Council 2021), implementation is highly decentralized through local governments
(Fang, Li, and Lu 2025). This can lead to wasteful
duplication and excess investment followed by capacity
cuts, as seen in sectors like coal and steel in the 2010s
(IMF 2018, 2019), but it can also favor policy experimentation. A case in point is the electric vehicle (EV)
sector. China made a strategic decision to prioritize
EVs in 2009, when the market was virtually nonexistent. The government initially provided producer
subsidies, leveraged public procurement, and required
carmakers to focus on EVs, but later shifted support
to consumer subsidies as it realized too many firms
were entering the market (Branstetter and Li 2023;
Chapter 2 of the April 2024 Fiscal Monitor).
The authors of this box are Daniel Garcia-Macia and Siddharth
Kothari.

Figure 3.1.1. China: Industrial Policy
Support
(Percent of GDP)
6

Tax

Subsidies

Credit

13

15

19

Land

5
4
3
2
1
0
2011

17

21

23

Sources: Baidu Maps; Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao 2025;
Ministry of Natural Resources of the People’s Republic of China;
Wind Information Co., Ltd.; and IMF staff calculations.
Note: Industrial policy is defined as sector-specific subsidies.
Results for listed firms are extrapolated to unlisted firms. See
further details in Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao (2025).

Despite the success in some technologies, industrial
policy appears to have lowered overall productivity by
distorting the allocation of production factors across
firms and sectors. Combining a sector-level measure
of industrial policy counts (Juhász and others 2022)
with revenue productivity outcomes for a large sample
of firms, Garcia-Macia, Kothari, and Tao (2025) show
that subsidies led to inefficiently high production in
targeted sectors, while trade and regulatory barriers
limited production to suboptimal levels, possibly by
increasing the market power of incumbent firms.
Evaluating these results with a structural model, factor
misallocation induced by industrial policies is found
to have reduced China’s aggregate total factor productivity by 1.2 percent and its GDP by as much as
2 percent.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

91

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box 3.2. Support or Distort: Evaluating National State Aid in Europe
Since the global financial crisis, EU governments
have increasingly supported firms through state
aid, which peaked at almost 1.5 percent of GDP in
2022. State aid is provided by national governments
and, therefore, risks skewing competition in favor of
domestic companies and eroding the level playing field
in the EU single market. This box examines how state
aid affects employment and revenue at beneficiary
firms as well as nonrecipients in competing industries across borders in Europe (Brandão-Marques and
Toprak 2024).
Drawing on firm-level data from six major EU
economies, regressions show that state aid provides a
lift to recipient firms, increasing revenues and employment, but only temporarily, as shown in Figure 3.2.1.
To ensure that the relationship is causal, state aid
shocks are defined as the unanticipated excess equity
return (in percent) observed the day government aid
to a firm is announced. A 1 percent state aid shock
is followed, after one year, by a 0.3 percent increase
in the recipient firm’s employment and a 0.6 percent
increase in its revenue. These gains, however, largely
dissipate by the second year, which is consistent with
state aid providing only temporary relief of financial constraints. The effects are strongest for smaller,
younger firms that are highly leveraged and have low
cash buffers.
Firms based in other EU countries that operate in
the same industry but do not receive state aid suffer
significant employment and revenue losses from
cross-border spillovers. After a 1 percent unanticipated
aid shock to a peer, employment in nonrecipient competing firms falls by about 0.13 percent and revenues
by roughly 0.24 percent the following year. These
adverse impacts deepen over time, with employment
declining by 0.21 percent and revenue dropping by
0.46 percent in the second year. Moreover, the effects
are more pronounced in more concentrated sectors.
This suggests that state aid distorts competition as
recipients tend to crowd out nonrecipient firms that
operate in the same industry.
These findings highlight a clear trade-off: While
national state aid by EU members can help recipients in the short run, state aid also causes negative
spillovers to firms operating in the same industry that
The authors of this box are Luis Brandão-Marques and Hasan
Toprak.

92

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Figure 3.2.1. Effects of State Aid on
Recipient and Nonrecipient Firms
Employment

Revenue

0.8 1. Effect on the Focal Firm
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2

0

After one year

After two years

2. Spillover

−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5

After one year

After two years

Sources: Brandão-Marques and Toprak 2024; and IMF staff
calculations.
Note: The bars show the impact of 1 percent excess return
(state‐aid shock) on recipient firms and on competing
nonrecipient firms. Solid bars indicate effects that are
statistically significant at the 10 percent level or higher, while
shaded bars denote effects that are not statistically significant.

do not receive the aid. This could risk fragmenting
Europe’s single market by disadvantaging firms across
borders and creating distortions that could jeopardize
the efficient allocation of resources and the benefits
from EU-wide competition. Hence, should there be a
case for state aid to firms in the EU to address specific
market failures, this should be done at the EU level
instead of by individual member states to mitigate
adverse spillovers and preserve equitable conditions for
firms across the single market. Moreover, by reducing
spillovers, the pooling of resources at the EU level
could also ensure a more efficient use of funds and
limit waste.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Box 3.3. A Comparison between Industrial and Structural Policies
Structural reforms can yield better outcomes than
industrial policies (IPs). Like IPs, structural reforms
aim at tackling key frictions hampering growth and
productivity. Unlike IPs, these policies target economy-wide frictions; their effectiveness generally does
not rely on information about sector-level characteristics, including distortions; and they have been
associated with improved macroeconomic outcomes
(Chapter 3 of the October 2019 World Economic Outlook; Budina and others 2023). But structural reforms
can also yield better sector-level outcomes than IPs.
For instance—and although estimation is imprecise—a
significant improvement in governance can boost
industry value added in high-distortion sectors (characterized by high markups) relative to low-markup
sectors by 2.1 percent, whereas IPs targeting sectors
with those distortions may be associated with only a
0.2 percent increase (Figure 3.3.1). Similarly, improvements in financial development and private sector
access to credit are more effective than IPs at bolstering economic activity in sectors highly dependent on
external financing (Baquie and others 2025).
In addition, while the fiscal costs of IPs can be
high—as they can entail sizable subsidies—structural
reforms often result in lower fiscal costs, and some
can even lead to increased fiscal revenues—for example, if they improve tax collection. Fiscal costs are an
important consideration at a time of limited fiscal space
(Aligishiev and others 2023; Chapter 2 of the April
2024 Fiscal Monitor). Therefore, structural reforms
seem to provide better results with lower fiscal costs and
reduced distortion risks. Given these trade-offs, countries should weigh the fiscal sustainability of IPs carefully and prioritize structural reforms that offer more
cost-effective paths to inclusive and sustained growth.
Even when IPs are desirable, structural reforms are
essential for their success. Structural fundamentals
such as governance quality or a good business environment could strengthen the link between IPs and economic performance by reducing risks of rent-seeking
behavior and improving targeting (IDB 2014; Cherif
and Hasanov 2019; Cherif and Hasanov 2020;
Criscuolo, Lalanne, and Díaz 2022; Criscuolo and
others 2022; Garcia-Macia and Sollaci 2025). Other
structural conditions, such as a more educated workThe author of this box is Rafael Machado Parente.

Figure 3.3.1. Industrial Policies versus
Governance Reforms
(Industry value added, percent)
6

Governance and markups
Industrial policies and markups

5
4
3
2
1
0
−1
−2
−3

−2

−1

0
Horizon

1

2

3

Sources: Baquie and others 2025; Budina and others 2023;
Global Trade Alert; Juhász and others 2022, 2025; Orbis; and
IMF staff calculations.
Note: The dependent variable is the log difference of the
sectoral-level value added over the horizon considered. 0 = the
short-term horizon corresponding to when industrial policies
are introduced. The variables of interest are the interaction
between the change in protectionist industrial policies and
sectoral markups and the interaction between sectoral markups
and the quality of governance index from Budina and others
(2023). Differently from Baquie and others (2025), the figure
reports changes from the 25th percentile to the median of the
distributions of markups, governance, and industrial policies.
Shaded areas represent 90 percent confidence intervals. For
more details, see Baquie and others (2025).

force, can enhance learning by doing and innovation
sparked by well-crafted IPs. Indeed, firms in countries
with a better business environment experience higher
capital accumulation in the short term in response
to IPs (Baquie and others 2025). Moreover, firms
in emerging market and developing economies with
better governance and higher human capital experience
higher value-added growth after the implementation
of IPs. Complementarity between IPs and structural
factors in emerging market and developing economies
suggests that policies to improve fundamentals may be
an important precondition for IPs’ success (Deléchat
and others 2024). Overall, these findings suggest a
phased approach: first strengthen structural factors,
then address sectoral issues with targeted interventions.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

93

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

References
Aghion, Philippe, Ufuk Akcigit, and Peter Howitt. 2015. “The
Schumpeterian Growth Paradigm.” Annual Review of Economics 7 (1): 557–75.
Aiyar, S., J. Chen, C. Ebeke, G. Garcia-Saltos, T. Gudmundsson,
A. Ilyina, A. Kangur, S. Rodriguez, M. Ruta, T. Schulze, G.
Soderberg and J. Trevino. 2023. “Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Future of Multilateralism.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 23/01, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Akerman, Ariel, Jacob Moscona, Heitor Pellegrina, and Karthik
Sastry. 2025. Public R&D Meets Economic Development:
Embrapa and Brazil’s Agricultural Revolution. NBER Working
Paper 34213.
Aligishiev, Zamid, Gabriela Cugat, Romain A. Duval, Davide
Furceri, João Tovar Jalles, Margaux MacDonald, Giovanni
Melina, and others. 2023. “Market Reforms and Public Debt
Dynamics in Emerging Market and Developing Economies.”
IMF Staff Discussion Note 23/005, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Alvarez, J., M. Benatiya Andaloussi, C. Maggi, A. Sollaci, M.
Stuermer, and P. Topalova. 2025. “Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Commodity Markets.” CEPR Discussion Paper
20451, Centre for Economic Policy Research, Paris. https://
cepr.org/publications/dp20451.
Aterido, Reyes, Mariana Iootty, and Martin Melecky. 2025.
“Energy Prices, Energy Intensity, and Firm Performance.”
Policy Research Working Paper 11069, World Bank Group,
Washington, DC.
Ayres, Joao, Garcia Marcio, Guillén Diogo, and Kehoe Patrick.
2019. “The Monetary and Fiscal History of Brazil, 1960–
2016.” NBER Working Paper 25421, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bai, Jie, Panle Jia Barwick, Shengmao Cao, and Shanjun Li.
2020. “Quid Pro Quo, Knowledge Spillover, and Industrial Quality Upgrading: Evidence from the Chinese Auto
Industry.” NBER Working Paper 27644, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Baquie, Sandra, Yueling Huang, Florence Jaumotte, Jaden Kim,
Rafael Machado Parente, and Samuel Pienknagura. 2025.
“Industrial Policies: Handle with Care.” IMF Staff Discussion
Note 25/002, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Bartelme, Dominick, Arnaud Costinot, Dave Donaldson, and
Andres Rodriguez-Clare. 2025. “The Textbook Case for
Industrial Policy: Theory Meets Data.” Journal of Political
Economy 133 (5): 1527–73.
Barwick, Panle Jia, Hyuk-Soo Kwon, Shanjun Li, and Nahim
B. Zahur. 2025. “Drive Down the Cost: Learning by Doing
and Government Policies in the Global EV Battery Industry.”
NBER Working Paper 33378, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF). 2024. Lithium-Ion
Battery Price Survey. Retrieved on 10/12/2024 . https://www.
bnef.com/login?r=%2Finsights%2F35513

94

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Bogmans, Christian, Patricia Gomez-Gonzalez, Ganchimeg
Ganpurev, Giovanni Melina, Andrea Pescatori, and
Sneha D. Thube. 2025. “Power Hungry: How AI Will
Drive Energy Demand.” IMF Working Paper 25/081,
International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. https://doi.
org/10.5089/9798229007207.001.
Brandão-Marques, Luis, and Hasan H. Toprak. “A Bitter Aftertaste: How State Aid Affects Recipient Firms and Their Competitors in Europe”, IMF Working Papers 2024, 250 (2024),
https://doi.org/10.5089/9798400295706.001
Branstetter, Lee G., and Guangwei Li. 2023. “The Challenges of
Chinese Industrial Policy.” In Entrepreneurship and Innovation
Policy and the Economy, vol. 3, edited by Benjamin Jones and
Josh Lerner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Brezis, Elise S., Paul R. Krugman, and Daniel Tsiddon. 1991.
“Leapfrogging: A Theory of Cycles in National Technological
Leadership.” NBER Working Paper 3886, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Budina, Nina, Christian H. Ebeke, Florence Jaumotte, Andrea
Medici, Augustus J. Panton, Marina M. Tavares, Bella Yao,
and others. 2023. “Structural Reforms to Accelerate Growth,
Ease Policy Trade-offs, and Support the Green Transition in
Emerging Market and Developing Economies.” IMF Staff
Discussion Note 23/007, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Carton, Benjamin, Geoffroy Dolphin, Romain Duval,
Andrew Hodge, Amit Kara, Simon Voigts, and Sebastian
Wende. Forthcoming. “The Investment Impacts of
Europe’s Green Transition.” International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Cherif, Reda, and Fuad Hasanov. 2019. “The Return of the
Policy That Shall Not Be Named: Principles of Industrial
Policy.” IMF Working Paper 19/074, International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Cherif, Reda, and Fuad Hasanov. 2020. “Principles of True
Industrial Policy.” Journal of Globalization and Development
2019003.
Choi, Jaedo, and Andrei Levchenko. 2024. “Superstars or Supervillains? Large Firms in the South Korean Growth Miracle.”
NBER Working Paper 32648, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Choi, Jaedo, and Younghun Shim. 2024a. “Industrialization
and the Big Push: Theory and Evidence from South Korea.”
IMF Working Paper 24/259, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Cooper, Russell, and Alok Johri. 2002. “Learning-by-Doing
and Aggregate Fluctuations.” Journal of Monetary Economics
49 (8): 1539–66.
Criscuolo, C., N. Gonne, K. Kitazawa, and G. Lalanne. 2022.
“An Industrial Policy Framework for OECD Countries: Old
Debates, New Perspectives.” OECD Science, Technology
and Industry Policy Paper 127, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Paris.

CHAPTER 3

INDUSTRIAL POLICY: MANAGING TRADE-OFFS TO PROMOTE GROWTH AND RESILIENCE

Criscuolo, C., G. Lalanne, and L. Díaz. 2022. “Quantifying
Industrial Strategies (QuIS): Measuring Industrial Policy
Expenditures.” OECD Science, Technology and Industry Working Paper 2022/05, Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development, Paris.
De Bolle, Monica, Jérémie Cohen-Setton, and Madi
Sarsenbayev. 2025. The New Economic Nationalism. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Deléchat, C., G. Melina, M. Newiak, C. Papageorgiou,
and N. Spatafora. 2024. “Economic Diversification in
Developing Countries: Lessons from Country Experiences
with Broad-based and Industrial Policies.” IMF
Departmental Paper 24/006, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Eugster, Johannes L., Giang Ho, Florence Jaumotte, and Roberto
Piazza. 2022. “International Knowledge Spillovers.” Journal of
Economic Geography 22 (6): 1191–224.
Evenett, Simon, Adam Jakubik, Jaden Kim, Fernando Martín,
Samuel Pienknagura, Michele Ruta, Sandra Baquie, Yueling
Huang, and Rafael Machado Parente. Forthcoming. “Industrial Policy since the Great Financial Crisis.” IMF Working
Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Evenett, Simon, Adam Jakubik, Fernando Martín, and Michele
Ruta. 2024. “The Return of Industrial Policy in Data.” The
World Economy 47 (7): 2762–88.
Fang, Hanming, Ming Li, and Guangli Lu. 2025. “Decoding
China’s Industrial Policies.” NBER Working Paper 33814,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Fontagné, Lionel, Philippe Martin, Gianluca Orefice. 2024.
“The Many Channels of Firm’s Adjustment to Energy Shocks:
Evidence from France.” Economic Policy 39 (117): 5–43.
Garcia-Macia, Daniel, Siddharth Kothari, and Yifan Tao. 2025.
“Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on
Misallocation.” IMF Working Paper 25/155, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Garcia-Macia, D., and A. Sollaci. 2025. “Industrial Policies
for Innovation: A Cost-Benefit Framework.” IMF Economic
Review, July.
Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Andrea F. Presbitero,
and Petia Topalova. 2025. “Changing Global Linkages: A
New Cold War?” Journal of International Economics 153:
104042.
Graziano, Alejandro G., Monika Sztajerowska, and Christian
Volpe Martincus. 2024. “Trading Places: How Trade Policy Is
Reshaping Multinational Firms’ Location.” CESifo Working
Paper 11514, Munich.
Harrison, Ann, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2010. “Trade,
Foreign Investment, and Industrial Policy for Developing
Countries.” In Handbook of Development Economics, edited by
Dani Rodrik and Mark Rosenzweig, ed. 1, vol. 5, chapter 0,
4039–214. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Head, Keith. 1994. “Infant Industry Protection in the Steel
Rail Industry.” Journal of International Economics 37 (3–4):
141–65.

Hodge, Andrew, Roberto Piazza, Fuad Hasanov, Xun Li,
Maryam Vaziri, Atticus Weller, and Yu Ching Wong. 2024.
“Industrial Policy in Europe: A Single Market Perspective.”
IMF Working Paper 24/249, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai, and Peter J. Klenow. 2009. “Misallocation
and Manufacturing TFP in China and India.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 124 (4): 1403–48.
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB). 2014. “Rethinking
Productive Development: Sound Policies and Institutions for
Economic Transformation.” Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2018. “China 2018 Article
IV Consultation Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 18/240,
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2019. “China 2019 Article
IV Consultation Staff Report.” IMF Country Report 19/266,
Washington, DC.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2024. “Industrial Policy
Coverage in IMF Surveillance—Broad Considerations.” IMF
Policy Paper 24/008, Washington, DC.
Itskhoki, Oleg, and Benjamin Moll. 2019. “Optimal Development
Policies with Financial Frictions.” Econometrica 87 (1): 139–73.
Ju, Jiandong, Hong Ma, Zi Wang, and Xiaodong Zhu. 2024.
“Trade Wars and Industrial Policy Competitions: Understanding the US-China Economic Conflicts.” Journal of Monetary
Economics 141: 42–58.
Juhász, Réka, Nathan Lane, Emily Oehlsen, and Verónica C.
Pérez. 2022. “The Who, What, When, and How of Industrial
Policy: A Text-Based Approach.” Working Paper. https://ssrn.
com/abstract=4198209.
Juhász, Réka, Nathan Lane, Emily Oehlsen, and Veronica C.
Perez. 2025. “Measuring Industrial Policy: A Text-Based
Approach.” NBER Working Paper 33895, National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Juhász, Réka, Nathan Lane, and Dani Rodrik. 2023. “The New
Economics of Industrial Policy.” NBER Working Paper 31538,
National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Kim, Minho, Munseob Lee, and Yongseok Shin. 2021. “The
Korean Heavy Industry Drive of 1973.” NBER Working
Paper 29252, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.
Lane, Nathan. 2025. “Manufacturing Revolutions: Industrial
Policy and Industrialization in South Korea.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 140 (3).
Lashkaripour, Ahmad, and Volodymyr Lugovskyy. 2023. “Profits,
Scale Economies, and the Gains from Trade and Industrial
Policy.” American Economic Review 113 (10): 2759–808.
Lee, Keun, and Chaisung Lim. 2001. “Technological Regimes,
Catching-Up and Leapfrogging: Findings from the Korean
Industries.” Research Policy 30 (3): 459–83.
Luzio, Eduardo, and Shane Greenstein. 1995. “Measuring the
Performance of a Protected Infant Industry: The Case of
Brazilian Microcomputers.” Review of Economics and Statistics
77 (4): 622–33.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

95

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Machado Parente, Rafael, Samuel Pienknagura, Sandra Baquie,
Yueling Huang, Florence Jaumotte, and Jaden Kim. 2025.
“Industrial Policies and Firm Performance: A Nuanced
Relationship.” IMF Working Paper 25/143, International
Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Melitz, Marc J. 2005. “When and How Should Infant Industries
Be Protected?” Journal of International Economics 66 (1):
177–96.
Ocampo, José Antonio, and Gabriel Porcile. 2020. “Latin
American Industrial Policies: A Comparative Perspective.” In
The Oxford Handbook of Industrial Policy, edited by Arkebe
Oqubay and others. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD). 2025. “Quantifying Industrial Strategies 2019–22:
Trends and Priorities across 11 OECD countries.” OECD
Science, Technology and Industry Policy Paper 179. Paris.
https://doi.org/10.1787/91e20a26-en.
Peres, Wilson, and Annalisa Primi. 2019. Industrial Policy and
Learning. Lessons from Latin America. In: How Nations
Learn: Technological Learning, Industrial Policy, and Catch-up.
Oxford University Press.
Redding, Stephen. 1999. “Dynamic Comparative Advantage and
the Welfare Effects of Trade.” Oxford Economic Papers 51 (1):
15–39.
Rodrik, Dani. 1993. “Taking Trade Policy Seriously: Export
Subsidization as a Case Study in Policy Effectiveness.”
NBER Working Paper 4567, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, MA.

96

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Rotunno, Lorenzo, and Michele Ruta. 2025. “Trade Partners’
Responses to US Tariffs.” IMF Working Paper 25/147, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ruta, Michele, and Monika Sztajerowska. 2025. “Shifting
Advantages: Do Subsidies Shape Cross-Border Investment?”
IMF Working Paper 25/080, International Monetary Fund,
Washington, DC.
Sabel, Charles, Eduardo Fernández-Arias, Ricardo Hausmann,
Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Ernesto Stein. 2012. Export
Pioneers in Latin America. Inter-American Development
Bank.
State Council of China (State Council). 2005. Decision of
the State Council on Promulgating and Implementing the
“Temporary Provisions on Promoting Industrial Structure
Adjustment.” Decision No. 40, Beijing.
State Council of China (State Council). 2021. Outline of the
People’s Republic of China 14th Five-Year Plan for National
Economic and Social Development and Long-Range Objectives for 2035. Beijing.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2017. “Industrial Policy, Learning and
Development.” In The Practice of Industrial Policy: Government—Business Coordination in Africa and East Asia, edited
by John Page and Finn Tarp, 23–39. Oxford, UK: Oxford
Academic.
Veiga, Pedro da Motta, and Sandra Polónia Rios. 2019.
EMBRAER and the Trajectory of Brazil’s Aeronautics Industry
Ecosystem. Policy Center for the New South, Policy Paper
19/18.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

T

he Statistical Appendix presents historical
data as well as projections. It comprises eight
sections: Assumptions, What’s New, Data
and Conventions, Country Notes, Classification of Economies, General Features and Composition
of Groups in the World Economic Outlook Classification, Key Data Documentation, and Statistical Tables.
The first section summarizes the assumptions
underlying the estimates and projections for 2025–26.
The second section briefly describes the changes to
the database and statistical tables since the April 2025
World Economic Outlook (WEO). The third section
offers a general description of the data and the conventions used for calculating country group composites.
The fourth section presents selected key information
for each country. The fifth section summarizes the classification of economies in the various groups presented
in the WEO, and the sixth section explains that classification in further detail. The seventh section provides
information on methods and reporting standards for
the member countries’ national account and government finance indicators included in the report.
The last, and main, section comprises the statistical
tables. Statistical Appendix A is included here; Statistical Appendix B is available online at www.imf.org/en/
Publications/WEO.
Data in these tables have been compiled based on
information available through September 30, 2025,
but may not reflect the latest published data in all
cases. For the date of the last data update for each
economy, please refer to the notes provided in the
online WEO database. The figures for 2025–26 are
shown with the same degree of precision as the historical figures solely for convenience; because they are
projections, the same degree of accuracy is not to be
inferred.

Assumptions
Real effective exchange rates for the advanced economies are assumed to remain constant at their average
levels measured during August 1, 2025–August 29,
2025. For 2025 and 2026, these assumptions imply
average US dollar–special drawing right conversion

rates of 1.351 and 1.373, US dollar–euro conversion
rates1 of 1.130 and 1.167, and yen–US dollar conversion rates of 147.7 and 145.3, respectively.
It is assumed that the price of oil will average $68.92
a barrel in 2025 and $65.84 a barrel in 2026.
National authorities’ established policies are assumed
to be maintained. Box A1 describes the more specific
policy assumptions underlying the projections for
selected economies.
With regard to interest rates, it is assumed that the
three-month government bond yield for the United States
will average 4.3 percent in 2025 and 3.7 percent in
2026, that for the euro area will average 2.0 percent in
2025 and 2.1 percent in 2026, and that for Japan will
average 0.4 percent in 2025 and 0.8 percent in 2026.
Further, it is assumed that the 10-year government bond
yield for the United States will average 4.3 percent in
2025 and 4.1 percent in 2026, that for the euro area
will average 2.5 percent in 2025 and 2.6 percent in
2026, and that for Japan will average 1.5 percent in
2025 and 1.7 percent in 2026.

What’s New
• Data for Liechtenstein have been added to the database and are included in the advanced economies
group composites.

Data and Conventions
Data and projections for 197 economies form the
statistical basis of the WEO database. The data are
maintained jointly by the IMF’s Research Department
and regional departments, with the latter regularly
updating country projections based on consistent
global assumptions.
1In regard to the introduction of the euro, on December 31,
1998, the Council of the European Union decided that, effective
January 1, 1999, the irrevocably fixed conversion rates between the
euro and currencies of the member countries adopting the euro are
as described in Box 5.4 of the October 1998 WEO. See that box
as well for details on how the conversion rates were established. For
the most recent table of fixed conversion rates, see the Statistical
Appendix of the April 2023 WEO.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

97

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Although national statistical agencies are the
ultimate providers of historical data and definitions,
international organizations are also involved in statistical issues, with the objective of harmonizing methodologies for the compilation of national statistics,
including analytical frameworks, concepts, definitions,
classifications, and valuation procedures used in the
production of economic statistics. The WEO database
reflects information from both national source agencies
and international organizations.
Most countries’ macroeconomic data as presented
in the WEO conform broadly to the 2008 version
of the System of National Accounts (SNA 2008). The
IMF’s sector statistical standards—the sixth edition of
the Balance of Payments and International Investment
Position Manual (BPM6), the Monetary and Financial Statistics Manual and Compilation Guide, and the
Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (GFSM
2014)—have been aligned with the SNA 2008. These
standards reflect the IMF’s special interest in countries’
external positions, monetary developments, financial
sector stability, and public sector fiscal positions. The
process of adapting country data to the new standards
begins in earnest when revised versions of the manuals
are released. However, full concordance with the most
recent versions of the manuals is ultimately dependent
on the provision by national statistical compilers of
revised country data; hence, the WEO estimates are
only partly adapted to the most recent versions of these
manuals. Nonetheless, for many countries, conversion
to the updated standards will have only a small impact
on major balances and aggregates. Many other countries have partly adopted the latest standards and will
continue implementation over a number of years.2
The fiscal gross and net debt data reported in the
WEO are drawn from official data sources and IMF
staff estimates. While attempts are made to align data
on gross and net debt with the definitions in the
GFSM 2014, because of data limitations or specific
country circumstances, these data can sometimes deviate from the formal definitions. Although every effort
is made to ensure the WEO data are relevant and
internationally comparable, differences in both sectoral
and instrument coverage mean that the data are not
2Many countries are implementing the SNA 2008 or European
System of National and Regional Accounts 2010, and a few countries use versions of the SNA older than that from 1993. A similar
adoption pattern is expected for the BPM6 and GFSM 2014. Please
refer to Table G, which lists the statistical standards to which each
country adheres.

98

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

universally comparable. As more information becomes
available, changes in either data sources or instrument
coverage can give rise to data revisions that are sometimes substantial. For clarification on the deviations
in sectoral or instrument coverage, please refer to the
metadata for the online WEO database.
Composite data for country groups in the WEO are
either sums or weighted averages of data for individual
countries. Unless noted otherwise, multiyear averages
of growth rates are expressed as compound annual rates
of change.3 Arithmetically weighted averages are used
for all data for the emerging market and developing
economies group—except data on inflation and money
growth, for which geometric averages are used. The
following conventions apply:
Country group composites for exchange rates, interest rates, and growth rates of monetary aggregates are
weighted by GDP converted to US dollars at market
exchange rates (averaged over the preceding three
years) as a share of group GDP.
Composites for other data relating to the domestic
economy, whether growth rates or ratios, are weighted
by GDP valued at purchasing power parity as a share
of total world or group GDP.4 For the aggregation
of inflation in advanced economies (and subgroups),
annual rates are simple percent changes from the
previous years; for the aggregation of world inflation
and inflation in emerging market and developing
economies (and subgroups), annual rates are based on
logarithmic differences.
Composites for real GDP per capita in
purchasing-power-parity terms are sums of individual
country data after conversion to international dollars
in the years indicated.
Unless noted otherwise, composites for all sectors
for the euro area are corrected for reporting discrepancies in transactions within the area. Unadjusted annual
3Averages for real GDP, inflation, GDP per capita, and commodity prices are calculated based on the compound annual rate of
change, except in the case of the unemployment rate, which is based
on the simple arithmetic average.
4See Box A2 in the Statistical Appendix of the October 2024
WEO for a summary of the revised purchasing-power-parity-based
weights as well as Box 1.1 of the October 2020 WEO, “Revised
Purchasing Power Parity Weights” in the July 2014 WEO Update,
Appendix 1.1 of the April 2008 WEO, Box A2 of the April
2004 WEO, Box A1 of the May 2000 WEO, and Annex IV of
the May 1993 WEO. See also Anne-Marie Gulde and Marianne
Schulze-Ghattas, “Purchasing Power Parity Based Weights for the
World Economic Outlook,” in Staff Studies for the World Economic Outlook (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund,
December 1993), 106–23.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

GDP data are used for the euro area and for the majority of individual countries, except Cyprus, Ireland,
Portugal, and Spain, which report calendar-adjusted
data. For data prior to 1999, data aggregations apply
1995 European currency unit exchange rates.
Composites for fiscal data are sums of individual
country data after conversion to US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the years indicated.
Composite unemployment rates and employment
growth are weighted by labor force as a share of group
labor force.
Composites relating to external sector statistics are
sums of individual country data after conversion to
US dollars at the average market exchange rates in the
years indicated for balance of payments data and at
end-of-year market exchange rates for debt denominated in currencies other than US dollars.
Composites of changes in foreign trade volumes
and prices, however, are arithmetic averages of percent
changes for individual countries weighted by the US dollar value of exports or imports as a share of total world
or group exports or imports (in the preceding year).
Unless noted otherwise, group composites are
computed if 90 percent or more of the share of group
weights is represented.
Data refer to calendar years, except in the case of
a few countries that use fiscal years; Table F lists the
economies with exceptional reporting periods for
national accounts and government finance data.
For some countries, the figures for 2024 and earlier
are based on estimates rather than actual outturns;
Table G lists the date of the latest actual outturns for
the indicators in the national accounts, prices, government finance, and balance of payments for each
country.

Country Notes
Afghanistan: Data for 2021–24 are reported for
selected indicators, with estimates for fiscal data.
GDP growth for 2024 is an estimate. Projections for
2025–30 are omitted because of an unusually high
degree of uncertainty, given that the IMF has paused
its engagement with Afghanistan owing to a lack of
clarity within the international community regarding
the recognition of a government in the country. Data
reported in the WEO contain a structural break in
2021 as a result of the change from calendar year to
solar year reporting; the actual reported GDP growth
rate for solar year 2021 is –20.7 percent.

Algeria: Total government expenditure and net
lending/borrowing include net lending by the government, which mostly reflects support to the pension
system and other public sector entities.
Argentina: The official national consumer price
index (CPI) starts in December 2016. For earlier periods, CPI data for Argentina reflect the Greater Buenos
Aires Area CPI (prior to December 2013); the national
CPI (IPCNu, December 2013 to October 2015);
the City of Buenos Aires CPI (November 2015 to
April 2016); and the Greater Buenos Aires Area
CPI (May 2016 to December 2016). Given limited
comparability of these series because of differences in
geographic coverage, weights, sampling, and methodology, the WEO does not report average CPI inflation
for 2014–16 and end-of-period inflation for 2015–16.
In addition, Argentina discontinued the publication
of labor market data starting in the fourth quarter of
2015, and new series became available starting in the
second quarter of 2016.
Bolivia: Projections for 2026–30 have been omitted
owing to significant uncertainty regarding the economic outlook.
Costa Rica: The central government definition was
expanded as of January 1, 2021, to include 51 public
entities in accordance with Law 9524. Data back to
2019 are adjusted for comparability.
Dominican Republic: The fiscal series have the
following coverage: Public debt, debt service, and
the cyclically adjusted/structural balances are for the
consolidated public sector (which includes the central
government, the rest of the nonfinancial public sector,
and the central bank); the remaining fiscal series are
for the central government.
Ecuador: Fiscal projections for 2025–30 are excluded
from publication because of ongoing program
discussions.
Eritrea: Data and projections for 2020–30 are
excluded from the database because of constraints in
data reporting.
India: Real GDP growth rates are calculated in
accordance with national accounts with base year
2011/12.
Iran: Historical figures for nominal GDP in US
dollars are computed using the official exchange rate
up to 2017. From 2018 onward, the NIMA (the
country’s domestic Forex Management Integrated System) exchange rate, rather than the official exchange
rate, is used to convert nominal rial GDP figures to
US dollars. The IMF staff assesses that the NIMA

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

99

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

rate better reflects the transaction-value-weighted
exchange rate in the economy over that period of
time.
Israel: Projections are subject to heightened uncertainty owing to the conflict in the region and thus may
undergo revisions.
Lebanon: Fiscal and national accounts data for
2022–24, as well as debt data for 2023–24, are IMF
staff estimates and not provided by the national
authorities. Estimates and projections for 2025–30
are omitted owing to an unusually high degree of
uncertainty.
Libya: Actual data and projections are subject to
high uncertainty due to frequent data revisions by the
authorities. Fiscal and debt data for 2024 are IMF staff
estimates based on information from the Central Bank
of Libya. National accounts data for 2020–24 are IMF
staff estimates.
Nigeria: National accounts data have been revised
and rebased, with 2019 as the new base year. This
replaces the 2010 benchmark and aligns national
accounts statistics with updated international standards, including the 2008 SNA, BPM6, and GFSM
2014. The rebasing entailed broader sectoral and data
coverage capturing previously unrecorded activities
such as the digital economy, parts of the informal
economy (particularly in the agriculture sector), pension and health insurance schemes, social insurance
trust funds, household firms, quarrying and other
minerals, and modular oil refining. Adding to dedicated sectoral studies, the rebasing drew on more comprehensive data coverage of household and informal
sector activity, including from the National Business
Sample Census and the Survey of Establishments, the
National Agricultural Sample Census and Survey, and
the 2019 and 2023 Nigeria Living Standards Surveys.
The rebasing exercise resulted in an upward revision
of the nominal GDP by 40.8 percent in 2019.
Pakistan: Projections do not yet reflect the impact
of flooding in summer 2025, whose impact is still
being assessed.
Sierra Leone: Although the currency was redenominated on July 1, 2022, local currency data are
expressed in the old leone for the October 2025 WEO.
Sri Lanka: Data and projections for 2025–30 are
excluded from publication owing to ongoing discussions on restructuring of sovereign debt.
Sudan: Projections reflect the IMF staff ’s analysis
based on the assumption that the ongoing conflict will terminate by the end of 2025 and that

100

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

reengagement and reconstruction will commence
shortly thereafter. Data for 2011 exclude South
Sudan after July 9; data for 2012 and onward pertain
to the current Sudan.
Syria: Data are excluded from 2011 onward because
of the uncertain political situation.
Timor-Leste: Published data for real GDP refer to
non-oil real GDP, while published data for nominal
GDP refer to total nominal GDP.
Turkmenistan: Real GDP data are IMF staff estimates compiled in line with international methodologies (SNA), using official estimates and sources as
well as United Nations and World Bank databases.
Estimates of and projections for the fiscal balance
exclude receipts from domestic bond issuances as
well as privatization operations, in line with the
GFSM 2014. The authorities’ official estimates for
fiscal accounts, which are compiled using domestic
statistical methodologies, include bond issuance
and privatization proceeds as part of government
revenues.
Ukraine: Revised data for national accounts are
available for 2000 onward and exclude Crimea and
Sevastopol from 2010 onward.
Uruguay: In December 2020, the authorities began
reporting national accounts data according to the SNA
2008, with base year 2016. The new series begin in
2016. Data prior to 2016 reflect the IMF staff ’s best
effort to preserve previously reported data and avoid
structural breaks.
Starting in October 2018, Uruguay’s public pension system received transfers in the context of Law
19,590 of 2017, which compensates people affected
by the creation of the country’s mixed pension system.
These funds are recorded as revenues, consistent with
the IMF’s methodology. Therefore, data for 2018–22
are affected by these transfers, which amounted to
1.2 percent of GDP in 2018, 1.0 percent of GDP
in 2019, 0.6 percent of GDP in 2020, 0.3 percent
of GDP in 2021, 0.1 percent of GDP in 2022, and
0 thereafter. See IMF Country Report 19/64 for further details.5 The disclaimer about the public pension
system applies only to the revenues and net lending/
borrowing series.
The coverage of the fiscal data for Uruguay was
changed from consolidated public sector to nonfinancial public sector with the October 2019 WEO.
5Uruguay: Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Country Report 19/64 (Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund,
February 2019).

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

In Uruguay, nonfinancial public sector coverage
includes the central government, local government,
social security funds, nonfinancial public corporations,
and Banco de Seguros del Estado. Historical data were
also revised accordingly. Under this narrower fiscal
perimeter—which excludes the central bank—assets
and liabilities held by the nonfinancial public sector,
for which the counterpart is the central bank, are not
netted out in debt figures. In this context, capitalization bonds issued in the past by the government to the
central bank are now part of the nonfinancial public
sector debt.
Venezuela: Projecting the economic outlook,
including assessing past and current economic
developments used as the basis for the projections, is
rendered difficult by the lack of discussions with the
authorities (the most recent Article IV consultation
took place in 2004), incomplete metadata for limited
reported statistics, and difficulties in reconciling
reported indicators with economic developments.
The fiscal accounts include the budgetary central
government; social security; FOGADE (the country’s
deposit insurance institution); and a reduced set of
public enterprises, including Petróleos de Venezuela,
S.A. Following some methodological upgrades to
achieve a more robust nominal GDP, historical data
and indicators expressed as a percentage of GDP have
been revised from 2012 onward. For most indicators,
data for 2018–24 are IMF staff estimates. The effects
of hyperinflation, the paucity of reported data, and
uncertainty mean that the IMF staff ’s estimated and
projected macroeconomic indicators should be interpreted with caution. Venezuela’s consumer prices are
excluded from all WEO group composites.
West Bank and Gaza: Estimates and projections for
2025–30 are excluded from publication owing to the
unusually high degree of uncertainty. Annual data for
the unemployment rate are available up to 2022.
Zimbabwe: The Zimbabwe authorities have recently
redenominated their national accounts statistics
following the introduction on April 5, 2024, of a new
national currency, the Zimbabwe gold, replacing the
Zimbabwe dollar. The use of the Zimbabwe dollar
ceased on April 30, 2024.

Classification of Economies
Summary of the Economy Classification
The economy classification in the WEO divides the
world into two major groups: advanced economies

and emerging market and developing economies.6 This
classification is not based on strict criteria, economic
or otherwise, and has evolved over time. The objective
is to facilitate analysis by providing a reasonably meaningful method of organizing data. Table A provides an
overview of the classification, showing the number of
economies in each group by region and summarizing
some key indicators of their relative size (GDP valued
at purchasing power parity, total exports of goods and
services, and population).
Some economies remain outside the classification
and therefore are not included in the analysis. Cuba
and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are
examples of economies that are not IMF members, and
the IMF therefore does not monitor them.

General Features and Composition of
Groups in the World Economic Outlook
Classification
Advanced Economies
Table B lists the 42 advanced economies. The seven
largest in terms of GDP based on market exchange
rates—the United States, Japan, Germany, France,
Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada—constitute
the subgroup of major advanced economies, often
referred to as the Group of Seven. The members of the
euro area are also distinguished as a subgroup. Composite data shown in the tables for the euro area cover
the current members for all years, even though the
membership has increased over time.
Table C lists the member countries of the European
Union, not all of which are classified as advanced
economies in the WEO.

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
The group of emerging market and developing
economies (155) comprises all those that are not classified as advanced economies.
The regional breakdowns of emerging market and
developing economies employed in the WEO are
emerging and developing Asia; emerging and developing Europe (sometimes also referred to as “central and
6As used here, the terms “country” and “economy” do not always
refer to a territorial entity that is a state as understood by international law and practice. Some territorial entities included here are
not states, although their statistical data are maintained on a separate
and independent basis.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

101

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

eastern Europe”); Latin America and the Caribbean;
Middle East and Central Asia (which comprises the
regional subgroups Caucasus and Central Asia; and
Middle East, North Africa, Afghanistan, and Pakistan);
and sub-Saharan Africa.
Emerging market and developing economies are also
classified according to analytical criteria that reflect
the composition of export earnings and a distinction between net creditor and net debtor economies.
Tables D and E show the detailed composition of
emerging market and developing economies in the
regional and analytical groups.
The analytical criterion source of export earnings
distinguishes between the categories fuel (Standard
International Trade Classification [SITC] 3) and
nonfuel and then focuses on nonfuel primary products
(SITCs 0, 1, 2, 4, and 68). Economies are categorized
into one of these groups if their main source of export
earnings exceeded 50 percent of total exports on average between 2020 and 2024.
The financial and income criteria focus on net
creditor economies, net debtor economies, heavily indebted
poor countries (HIPCs), low-income developing countries (LIDCs), and emerging market and middle-income
economies (EMMIEs). Economies are categorized as net
debtors when their latest net international investment
position, where available, was less than zero or their
current account balance accumulations from 1972

102

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

(or earliest available data) to 2024 were negative. Net
debtor economies are further differentiated based on
experience with debt servicing.7
The HIPC group comprises the countries that are
or have been considered by the IMF and the World
Bank for participation in their debt initiative known as
the HIPC Initiative, which aims to reduce the external
debt burdens of all the eligible HIPCs to a “sustainable” level in a reasonably short period of time.8 Many
of these countries have already benefited from debt
relief and have graduated from the initiative.
The LIDCs are countries that have per capita
income levels below a certain threshold (based on
$2,700 in 2017 as measured by the World Bank’s Atlas
method and updated following new information in
early 2024), structural features consistent with limited
development and structural transformation, and external financial linkages insufficiently close for them to be
widely seen as emerging market economies.
The EMMIEs are emerging market and developing
economies not classified as LIDCs.
7During 2020–24, 41 economies incurred external payments
arrears or entered into official or commercial bank debt-rescheduling
agreements. This group is referred to as economies with arrears and/or
rescheduling during 2020–24.
8See David Andrews, Anthony R. Boote, Syed S. Rizavi, and
Sukwinder Singh, “Debt Relief for Low-Income Countries: The
Enhanced HIPC Initiative,” IMF Pamphlet Series 51 (Washington,
DC: International Monetary Fund, November 1999).

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A. Classification by World Economic Outlook Groups and Their Shares in Aggregate GDP, Exports of Goods
and Services, and Population, 20241
(Percent of total for group or world)

Exports of Goods and
Services

GDP1

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies
Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
China
India
Emerging and Developing Europe
Russia
Latin America and the Caribbean
Brazil
Mexico
Middle East and Central Asia
Saudi Arabia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Nigeria
South Africa
Analytical Groups2
By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of which, Primary Products
By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Of which, Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2020–24
Other Groups2
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
Heavily Indebted Poor Countries

Number of
Economies

Advanced
Economies

42

100.0
37.3
29.0
7.6
5.6
4.6
3.4
8.3
5.5
3.3
16.5
72.3

20

18
7

World

Advanced
Economies

39.6
14.8
11.5
3.0
2.2
1.8
1.4
3.3
2.2
1.3
6.5

100.0
16.5
41.3
9.9
5.4
4.0
3.3
4.7
5.7
3.7
28.1

Population

World

Advanced
Economies

World

61.0
10.0
25.2
6.0
3.3
2.4
2.0
2.9
3.5
2.3
17.2

100.0
30.8
31.8
7.6
6.2
5.3
4.4
11.2
6.3
3.7
16.1

13.8
4.3
4.4
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.6
1.6
0.9
0.5
2.2

28.7

49.8

30.4

71.2

9.8

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

Emerging
Market and
Developing
Economies

World

155

100.0

60.4

100.0

39.0

100.0

86.2

30

57.1
32.0
13.6
12.9
5.8
11.9
4.0
2.8
12.3
2.1
5.8
1.8
0.8

34.4
19.3
8.2
7.8
3.5
7.2
2.4
1.7
7.4
1.3
3.5
1.1
0.5

50.3
30.2
6.6
15.1
3.8
14.0
3.1
5.4
16.6
2.9
4.1
0.5
1.0

19.6
11.8
2.6
5.9
1.5
5.4
1.2
2.1
6.5
1.1
1.6
0.2
0.4

55.0
20.4
21.1
5.3
2.1
9.4
3.1
1.9
13.3
0.5
17.1
3.4
0.9

47.4
17.6
18.2
4.6
1.8
8.1
2.7
1.7
11.4
0.4
14.7
2.9
0.8

26
127
35

10.4
89.6
3.6

6.3
54.1
2.2

15.8
84.2
4.3

6.2
32.8
1.7

9.9
90.0
8.7

8.6
77.6
7.5

117

48.4

29.2

41.6

16.2

66.9

57.7

43

5.5

3.3

3.8

1.5

13.4

11.5

96
58
39

92.6
7.4
2.8

55.9
4.5
1.7

95.9
4.1
2.3

37.4
1.6
0.9

76.8
23.2
13.0

66.2
20.0
11.2

15
33
32
45

1 GDP shares are based on the purchasing-power-parity valuation of economies’ GDP. The number of economies comprising each group reflects those for which
data are included in the group aggregates.
2 West Bank and Gaza is omitted from group composites for source of export earnings and Syria is omitted from group composites across all Analytical and Other
Groups because of insufficient data.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

103

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table B. Advanced Economies by Subgroup
Major Currency Areas
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Euro Area
Austria
Germany
Belgium
Greece
Croatia
Ireland
Cyprus
Italy
Estonia
Latvia
Finland
Lithuania
France
Luxembourg
Major Advanced Economies
Canada
Italy
France
Japan
Germany
United Kingdom
Other Advanced Economies
Andorra
Israel
Australia
Korea
Czech Republic
Liechtenstein
Denmark
Macao SAR2
New Zealand
Hong Kong SAR1
Iceland
Norway

Malta
The Netherlands
Portugal
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain

United States

Puerto Rico
San Marino
Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Taiwan Province of China

1 On July 1, 1997, Hong Kong was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special
Administrative Region of China.
2 On December 20, 1999, Macao was returned to the People’s Republic of China and became a Special
Administrative Region of China.

Table C. European Union
Austria
Belgium
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Estonia
Finland

104

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

France
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Latvia
Lithuania
Luxembourg

Malta
The Netherlands
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Spain
Sweden

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table D. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region and Main Source of Export Earnings1
Emerging and Developing Asia

Latin America and the Caribbean

Middle East and Central Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Fuel

Nonfuel Primary Products

Brunei Darussalam
Timor-Leste

Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Mongolia
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tuvalu

Ecuador
Guyana
Venezuela

Bolivia
Chile
Paraguay
Peru
Suriname
Uruguay

Algeria
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Iran
Iraq
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Libya
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Yemen2

Afghanistan
Mauritania
Somalia
Sudan
Tajikistan

Angola
Chad
Republic of Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Gabon
Nigeria
South Sudan

Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Central African Republic
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Eritrea
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Zambia
Zimbabwe

1 Emerging and developing Europe is omitted from the table because no economies in the group have fuel or nonfuel primary products as their main source of
export earnings.
2 Yemen does not currently export oil due to the internal conflict.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

105

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and
Per Capita Income Classification
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Per Capita
Income
Classification3

Emerging and Developing Asia

Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Per Capita
Income
Classification3

Poland

*

•

Bangladesh

*

*

Romania

*

•

Bhutan

*

*

Russia

•

•

Brunei Darussalam

•

•

Serbia

*

•

Cambodia

*

*

Türkiye

*

•

China

•

•

Ukraine

*

•

Fiji

*

•

Latin America and the Caribbean

India

*

•

Antigua and Barbuda

*

•

Indonesia

*

•

Argentina

•

•

Kiribati

•

*

Aruba

*

•

Lao P.D.R.

*

*

The Bahamas

*

•

Malaysia

•

•

Barbados

*

•

Maldives

*

•

Belize

*

Marshall Islands

•

•

Bolivia

*

Micronesia

•

•

Brazil

*

•

Mongolia

*

•

Chile

*

•

Myanmar

*

*

Colombia

*

•

Nauru

•

•

Costa Rica

*

•

Nepal

•

*

Dominica

*

•

Palau

*

•

Dominican Republic

*

•

Papua New Guinea

*

*

Ecuador

*

•

Philippines

*

•

El Salvador

*

•

Samoa

*

•

Grenada

*

•

Solomon Islands

*

*

Guatemala

*

Sri Lanka

*

•

Guyana

•

•

Thailand

•

•

Haiti

*

•

*

Timor-Leste

•

*

Honduras

*

•

*

Tonga

*

•

Jamaica

*

Tuvalu

•

•

Mexico

*

Vanuatu

*

•

Nicaragua

*

Vietnam

•

•

Panama

*

•

Emerging and Developing Europe

•
•

•

•
•

•
•
•

*

Paraguay

*

•

Albania

*

•

Peru

*

•

Belarus

*

•

St. Kitts and Nevis

*

•

Bosnia and Herzegovina

*

•

St. Lucia

*

•

Bulgaria

*

•

*

•

Hungary

*

•

St. Vincent and the
Grenadines

Kosovo

*

•

Suriname

*

•

Moldova

*

*

Trinidad and Tobago

•

•

Montenegro

*

•

Uruguay

*

•

North Macedonia

*

•

Venezuela

•

•

106

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table E. Emerging Market and Developing Economies by Region, Net External Position, Heavily Indebted Poor Countries, and
Per Capita Income Classification (continued)
Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Per Capita
Income
Classification3

•

*

Middle East and Central Asia

Net External
Position1

Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries2

Per Capita
Income
Classification3

Cameroon

*

•

*

Central African Republic

*

•

*

Afghanistan

•

Algeria

•

•

Chad

*

•

*

Armenia

*

•

Comoros

*

•

*

Azerbaijan

•

•

*

•

*

Bahrain

•

•

Democratic Republic of
the Congo

Djibouti

*

*

Republic of Congo

*

•

*

Egypt

*

•

Côte d’Ivoire

*

•

*

Georgia

*

•

Equatorial Guinea

•

Iran

•

•

Eritrea

•

Iraq

•

•

Eswatini

•

Jordan

*

•

Kazakhstan

*

•

Kuwait

•

•

Kyrgyz Republic

*

*

Lebanon

*

•

Libya

•

•

Mauritania

*

Morocco

*

•

Oman

*

•

Pakistan

*

•

Qatar

•

•

Saudi Arabia

•

•

Somalia

*

•

Sudan

*

*

Syria4

...

•

*

*
*
...

•
*

*
•

Ethiopia

*

Gabon

•

•

*

The Gambia

*

•

*

Ghana

*

•

*

Guinea

*

•

*

Guinea-Bissau

*

•

*

Kenya

*

Lesotho

*

Liberia

*

•

*

Madagascar

*

•

*

Malawi

*

•

*

Mali

*

•

Mauritius

•

•

*
*

*
•

Mozambique

*

Namibia

•

•

*

Niger

*

Nigeria

*

Rwanda

*

•

*

São Tomé and Príncipe

*

•

*

Senegal

*

•

Seychelles

*

•
•

*

Tajikistan

*

*

Tunisia

*

•

Turkmenistan

•

•

United Arab Emirates

•

•

Uzbekistan

•

*

West Bank and Gaza

*

•

Yemen

*

*

Sierra Leone

*

South Africa

•

•

South Sudan

*

Tanzania

*

•

*

Togo

*

•

*

Uganda

*

•

*

Zambia

*

•

*

Zimbabwe

*

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola

*

Benin

*

Botswana

•

Burkina Faso

*

•

*

Burundi

*

•

*

Cabo Verde

*

•

*
•

•

*

*
•

•

*
•
*

*

1 Dot (star) indicates that the country is a net creditor (net debtor).

2 Dot (star) indicates that the country has (has not) reached the initiative’s completion point, which allows it to receive the full debt relief committed to at the initiative’s decision point.
3 Dot (star) indicates that the country is classified as an emerging market and middle-income economy (low-income developing country).

4 Syria is omitted from group composites for net external position and per capita income classification for lack of a fully developed database.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

107

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table F. Economies with Exceptional Reporting Periods1
Afghanistan
The Bahamas
Bangladesh
Barbados
Bhutan
Botswana
Dominica
Egypt
Eswatini
Ethiopia
Fiji
Haiti
Hong Kong SAR
India
Iran
Jamaica
Lesotho
Marshall Islands
Mauritius
Micronesia
Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Pakistan
Palau
Puerto Rico
Samoa
Singapore
St. Lucia
Thailand
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago

National Accounts

Government Finance

Apr/Mar

Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Aug/Jul
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep

Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Apr/Mar
Oct/Sep
Oct/Sep
Apr/Mar
Jul/Jun
Aug/Jul
Jul/Jun
Oct/Sep
Jul/Jun
Jul/Jun

Jul/Jun

Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region
1 Unless noted otherwise, all data refer to calendar years.

108

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation
National Accounts

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Base Year2

System of
National
Accounts

NSO

2024/25

2016

SNA 2008

IMF staff

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 2020

Algerian dinar

NSO

2024

2001

SNA 2008

From 2005

Andorra

Euro

NSO

2024

2010

Angola

Angolan kwanza

NSO

2024

Antigua and Barbuda

Eastern Caribbean
dollar

CB

Argentina

Argentine peso

Armenia

Armenian dram

Aruba

Country

Currency

Historical Data
Source1

Afghanistan

Afghan afghani

Albania

Albanian lek

Algeria

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

NSO

2024/25

NSO

2024

NSO

2024

...

NSO

2024

2015

ESA 1995

NSO

2024

2023

2018

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

NSO

2024

2004

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

NSO

2024

2005

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Aruban florin

NSO

2021

2013

SNA 1993

From 2000

NSO

2024

Australia

Australian dollar

NSO

2024

2022

SNA 2008

From 1980

NSO

2024

Austria

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1995

NSO

2024

Azerbaijan

Azerbaijan manat

NSO

2024

2005

SNA 1993

From 1994

NSO

2024

The Bahamas

Bahamian dollar

NSO

2024

2018

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Bahrain

Bahrain dinar

NSO

2024

2010

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Bangladesh

Bangladesh taka

NSO

2024/25

2015/16

SNA 2008

Other

2024/25

Barbados

Barbados dollar

NSO

2024

2016

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Belarus

Belarusian ruble

NSO

2024

2022

SNA 2008

From 2005

NSO

2024

Belgium

Euro

CB

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1995

CB

2024

Belize

Belize dollar

NSO

2024

2014

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Benin

CFA franc

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Bhutan

Bhutanese ngultrum

NSO

2023/24

2016/17

SNA 2008

NSO

2024/25

Bolivia

Bolivian boliviano

NSO

2024

1990

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

Bosnian convertible
marka

NSO

2024

2021

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Botswana

Botswana pula

NSO

2024

2016

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Brazil

Brazilian real

NSO

2024

1995

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Brunei Darussalam

Brunei dollar

MoF

2024

2010

SNA 2008

MoF

2024

Bulgaria

Bulgarian lev

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1996

NSO

2024

Burkina Faso

CFA franc

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

From 2015

NSO

2024

Burundi

Burundi franc

NSO

2024

2005

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Cabo Verde

Cabo Verdean escudo

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Cambodia

Cambodian riel

NSO

2024

2014

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Cameroon

CFA franc

NSO

2024

2016

SNA 2008

From 2016

NSO

2024

Canada

Canadian dollar

NSO

2024

2017

SNA 2008

From 1980

NSO

2024

Central African
Republic

CFA franc

NSO

2019

2005

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Chad

CFA franc

NSO

2023

2017

SNA 2008

From 2005

NSO

2024

Chile

Chilean peso

CB

2024

2018

SNA 2008

From 2003

NSO

2024

China

Chinese yuan

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Colombia

Colombian peso

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Comoros

Comorian franc

NSO

2024

2007

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Democratic Republic
of the Congo

Congolese franc

NSO

2020

2005

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Republic of Congo

CFA franc

NSO

2021

2005

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

From 2021

From 2011

From 2005
From 2005

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

109

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Balance of Payments
Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Country

Historical Data
Source1

Afghanistan

MoF

2024/25

2001

CG

C

CB

2023/24

BPM 6

Albania

IMF staff

2024

1986

CG,LG,SS,MPC

...

CB

2024

BPM 6

Algeria

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Andorra

NSO

2023

...

CG,LG,SS

C

NSO

2023

BPM 6

Angola

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG

Mixed

CB

2024

BPM 6

Antigua and Barbuda

MoF

2024

2001

CG

Mixed

CB

2024

BPM 6

Argentina

MEP

2024

1986

CG,SG,SS

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Armenia

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Aruba

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Australia

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Austria

NSO

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Azerbaijan

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

The Bahamas

MoF

2023/24

2014

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Bahrain

MoF

2023

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Bangladesh

MoF

2024/25

2001

CG

C

CB

2024/25

BPM 6

Barbados

MoF

2024/25

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Belarus

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Belgium

CB

2024

ESA 2010

CG,SG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Belize

MoF

2024

1986

CG,MPC

...

CB

2024

BPM 6

Benin

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

Bhutan

MoF

2024/25

1986

CG

C

CB

2023/24

BPM 6

Bolivia

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Bosnia and
Herzegovina

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Botswana

MoF

2023/24

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Brazil

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Brunei Darussalam

MoF

2023

1986

CG

C

MoF

2024

BPM 6

Bulgaria

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Burkina Faso

MoF

2024

2001

CG

...

CB

2023

BPM 6

Burundi

MoF

2024

2001

CG

Mixed

CB

2024

BPM 6

Cabo Verde

MoF

2024

2001

CG

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Cambodia

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Cameroon

MoF

2024

2001

CG

Mixed

MoF

2024

BPM 6

Canada

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Central African
Republic

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2019

BPM 5

Chad

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2022

BPM 5

Chile

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

China

MoF

2024

...

CG,LG,SS

C

GAD

2024

BPM 6

Colombia

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG,SS

...

CB

2024

BPM 6

Comoros

MoF

2024

1986

CG

...

CB and IMF staff

2024

BPM 5

Democratic Republic
of the Congo

MoF

2023

2001

CG,LG

A

CB

2023

BPM 6

Republic of Congo

MoF

2024

2001

CG

A

CB

2021

BPM 6

110

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Subsectors Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Base Year2

System of
National
Accounts

CB

2024

2017

SNA 2008

From 2016

CB

2024

NSO

2023

2015

SNA 2008

From 2015

NSO

2024

Euro

NSO

2024

2021

ESA 2010

Cyprus

Euro

Other

2024

2020

ESA 2010

Czech Republic

Czech koruna

NSO

2024

2020

Denmark

Danish krone

NSO

2024

2020

Djibouti

Djibouti franc

NSO

2023

2013

Dominica

Eastern Caribbean
dollar

NSO

2023

Dominican Republic

Dominican peso

CB

Ecuador

US dollar

CB

Egypt

Egyptian pound

El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea

Country

Currency

Historical Data
Source1

Costa Rica

Costa Rican colón

Côte d'Ivoire

CFA franc

Croatia

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

NSO

2024

From 1995

Other

2024

ESA 2010

From 1995

NSO

2024

ESA 2010

From 1980

NSO

2024

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

2024

2018

SNA 2008

From 2018

CB

2024

2024

2018

SNA 2008

From 2018

NSO

2024

MEP

2023/24

2021/22

SNA 2008

Other

2024/25

US dollar

CB

2024

2014

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

CFA franc

MEP

2024

2006

SNA 1993

MEP

2024

Eritrea

Eritrean nakfa

Other

2019

2011

SNA 1993

Other

2019

Estonia

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Eswatini

Swazi lilangeni

NSO

2023

2019

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Ethiopia

Ethiopian birr

NSO

2023/24

2015/16

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Fiji

Fijian dollar

NSO

2024

2014

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Finland

Euro

NSO

2024

2015

ESA 2010

From 1980

NSO

2024

France

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1980

NSO

2024

Gabon

CFA franc

MEP

2024

2001

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

The Gambia

Gambian dalasi

NSO

2023

2013

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Georgia

Georgian lari

NSO

2024

2019

SNA 2008

From 1996

NSO

2024

Germany

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1991

NSO

2024

Ghana

Ghanaian cedi

NSO

2023

2013

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Greece

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Grenada

Eastern Caribbean
dollar

NSO

2022

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

Guatemala

Guatemalan quetzal

CB

2024

2013

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Guinea

Guinean franc

NSO

2021

2010

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Guinea-Bissau

CFA franc

NSO

2023

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Guyana

Guyanese dollar

NSO

2024

20126

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Haiti

Haitian gourde

NSO

2024/25

2011/12

SNA 2008

NSO

2024/25

From 2010

From 1995

From 2001
From 2015

Honduras

Honduran lempira

CB

2024

2000

SNA 1993

CB

2024

Hong Kong SAR

Hong Kong dollar

NSO

2024

2023

SNA 2008

From 1980

NSO

2024

Hungary

Hungarian forint

NSO

2024

2021

ESA 2010

From 2021

NSO

2024

Iceland

Icelandic króna

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1990

NSO

2024

India

Indian rupee

NSO

2024/25

2011/12

SNA 2008

NSO

2024/25

Indonesia

Indonesian rupiah

NSO

2024

2010

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Iran

Iranian rial

CB

2024/25

2021/22

SNA 2008

CB

2024/25

Iraq

Iraqi dinar

NSO

2024

2007

...

NSO

2024

Ireland

Euro

NSO

2024

2023

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

From 1995

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

111

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Balance of Payments
Subsectors Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Country

Historical Data
Source1

Costa Rica

Other

2024

1986

CG,NFPC

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Côte d'Ivoire

MoF

2024

1986

CG

A

CB

2023

BPM 6

Croatia

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Cyprus

Other

2024

ESA 2010

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Czech Republic

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Denmark

NSO

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Djibouti

MoF

2024

1986

CG

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Dominica

MoF

2023/24

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Dominican Republic

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

Mixed

CB

2024

BPM 6

Ecuador

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG,SS

Mixed

CB

2024

BPM 6

Egypt

MoF

2023/24

...

CG,LG,SS,NFPC

C

CB

2023/24

BPM 5

El Salvador

Other

2024

1986

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Equatorial Guinea

MEP

2023

1986

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 5

Eritrea

Other

2019

2001

CG

C

Other

2019

BPM 5

Estonia

MoF

2024

...

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Eswatini

MoF

2024/25

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Ethiopia

MoF

2023/24

1986

CG,SG,LG

C

CB

2023/24

BPM 5

Fiji

MoF

2023/24

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Finland

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

France

NSO

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Gabon

IMF staff

2023

2001

CG

A

IMF staff

2021

BPM 6

The Gambia

MoF

2023

1986

CG

C

CB and IMF staff

2023

BPM 6

Georgia

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Germany

NSO

2024

ESA 2010

CG,SG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Ghana

MoF

2023

2001

CG

CB

CB

2023

BPM 5

Greece

NSO

2024

ESA 2010

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Grenada

MoF

2022

...

CG

CB

NSO

2022

BPM 6

Guatemala

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Guinea

MoF

2024

2014

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Guinea-Bissau

MoF

2024

2001

CG

CB

CB

2023

BPM 6

Guyana

MoF

2023

1986

CG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Haiti

MoF

2024/25

1986

CG

C

CB

2024/25

BPM 5

Honduras

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

Mixed

CB

2024

BPM 5

Hong Kong SAR

MoF

2023/24

2001

CG

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Hungary

MEP

2024

ESA 2010

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Iceland

NSO

2023

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

India

MoF

2024/25

2001

CG,SG

C

CB

2024/25

BPM 6

Indonesia

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Iran

MoF

2023/24

2001

CG

C

CB

2024/25

BPM 5

Iraq

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Ireland

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

112

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Base Year2

System of
National
Accounts

NSO

2024

2020

SNA 2008

From 1995

NSO

2024

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1980

NSO

2024

Jamaican dollar

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Japan

Japanese yen

Other

2024

2015

SNA 2008

Other

2024

Jordan

Jordanian dinar

NSO

2024

2016

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Kazakhstan

Kazakhstani tenge

NSO

2023

2005

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

Kenya

Kenyan shilling

NSO

2024

2016

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Kiribati

Australian dollar

NSO

2023

2019

SNA 2008

NSO

2023

Korea

South Korean won

CB

2024

2020

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Kosovo

Euro

NSO

2024

2016

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Kuwait

Kuwaiti dinar

NSO

2024

2010

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Kyrgyz Republic

Kyrgyz som

NSO

2024

2005

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Lao P.D.R.

Lao kip

NSO

2024

2012

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Latvia

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 2020

Other

2024

Lebanon

Lebanese pound

NSO

2021

2019

SNA 2008

From 2019

NSO

2024

Lesotho

Lesotho loti

NSO

2023/24

2012/13

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Liberia

US dollar

IMF staff

2024

2018

SNA 1993

Other

2024

Libya

Libyan dinar

MEP

2019

2013

SNA 1993

Other

2024

Liechtenstein

Swiss franc

NSO

2023

2013

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Lithuania

Euro

NSO

2024

2021

ESA 2010

NSO

2024
2024

Country

Currency

Historical Data
Source1

Israel

Israeli new shekel

Italy

Euro

Jamaica

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

Historical Data
Source1

From 1980
From 1994

From before
1980

From 2010

From 2005

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Luxembourg

Euro

NSO

2024

2015

ESA 2010

From 1995

NSO

Macao SAR

Macanese pataca

NSO

2024

2023

SNA 2008

From 2023

NSO

2024

Madagascar

Malagasy ariary

NSO

2022

2007

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

Malawi

Malawian kwacha

NSO

2024

2017

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Malaysia

Malaysian ringgit

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Maldives

Maldivian rufiyaa

MoF

2024

2019

SNA 2008

CB

2024

Mali

CFA franc

NSO

2023

1999

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

Malta

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

Marshall Islands

US dollar

NSO

2022/23

2014/15

SNA 2008

Mauritania

New Mauritanian
ouguiya

NSO

2023

1998

SNA 2008

Mauritius

Mauritian rupee

NSO

2023

2018

SNA 2008

Mexico

Mexican peso

NSO

2024

2018

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Micronesia

US dollar

NSO

2022/23

2003/04

SNA 2008

NSO

2023/24

Moldova

Moldovan leu

NSO

2024

1995

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Mongolia

Mongolian tögrög

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Montenegro

Euro

NSO

2024

2006

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Morocco

Moroccan dirham

NSO

2024

2014

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Mozambique

Mozambican metical

NSO

2023

2019

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Myanmar

Myanmar kyat

Other

2020/21

2015/16

...

Other

2021/22

Namibia

Namibian dollar

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Nauru

Australian dollar

Other

2020/21

2012/13

SNA 2008

NSO

2023/24

Nepal

Nepalese rupee

NSO

2024/25

2010/11

SNA 2008

CB

2024/25

The Netherlands

Euro

NSO

2024

2021

ESA 2010

From 1980

NSO

2024

New Zealand

New Zealand dollar

NSO

2024

20096

SNA 2008

From 1987

IMF staff

2024

From 2000

NSO

2024

NSO

2023

From 2014

NSO

2023

From 1999

NSO

2024

From 2007

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

113

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Balance of Payments
Subsectors Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Country

Historical Data
Source1

Israel

Other

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

...

Other

2024

BPM 6

Italy

NSO

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Jamaica

MoF

2024/25

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Japan

Other

2023

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

MoF

2024

BPM 6

Jordan

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SS,MPC

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Kazakhstan

MoF

2023

2001

CG,LG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

Kenya

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Kiribati

MoF

2023

1986

CG

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Korea

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Kosovo

MoF

2024

1986

CG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Kuwait

MoF

2023

2014

CG,SS

Mixed

CB

2024

BPM 6

Kyrgyz Republic

MoF

2024

...

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Lao P.D.R.

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Latvia

MoF

2024

ESA 2010

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Lebanon

MoF

2021

2001

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 5

Lesotho

MoF

2023/24

2014

CG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Liberia

MoF

2024

2001

CG

A

CB

2024

BPM 5

Libya

CB

2024

1986

CG,SG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Liechtenstein

NSO

2023

2014

SG

A

IMF staff

2021

BPM 6

Lithuania

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Luxembourg

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Macao SAR

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SS

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Madagascar

MoF

2024

1986

CG

CB

CB

2023

BPM 6

Malawi

MoF

2024

2014

CG

C

NSO

2023

BPM 6

Malaysia

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Maldives

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Mali

MoF

2023

2001

CG

...

CB

2023

BPM 6

Malta

Other

2024

2001

CG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Marshall Islands

MoF

2022/23

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2023

BPM 6

Mauritania

MoF

2023

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Mauritius

MoF

2022/23

2001

CG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Mexico

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Micronesia

MoF

2020/21

2001

CG,SG

A

NSO

2017/18

BPM 6

Moldova

MoF

2024

1986

CG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Mongolia

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Montenegro

MoF

2024

1986

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Morocco

MEP

2024

2001

CG

A

GAD

2024

BPM 6

Mozambique

MoF

2023

2001

CG,SG, LG

...

CB

2022

BPM 6

Myanmar

Other

2019/20

2014

CG

C

IMF staff

2021/22

BPM 6

Namibia

MoF

2023

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Nauru

MoF

2023/24

2001

CG

C

IMF staff

2022/23

BPM 6

Nepal

MoF

2024/25

2001

CG

C

CB

2024/25

BPM 6

The Netherlands

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

New Zealand

NSO

2024

2014

CG, LG

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

114

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Base Year2

System of
National
Accounts

CB

2024

2006

SNA 2008

CB

2024

NSO

2022

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Nigerian naira

NSO

2024

2019

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

North Macedonia

Macedonian denar

NSO

2024

2005

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Norway

Norwegian krone

NSO

2024

2022

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Oman

Omani rial

NSO

2024

2018

SNA 2008

Pakistan

Pakistan rupee

NSO

2024/25

2015/16

SNA 2008

Palau

US dollar

MoF

2023/24

2018/19

SNA 1993

Panama

US dollar

NSO

2024

2018

SNA 1993

Papua New Guinea

Papua New Guinea
kina

Other

2023

2013

Paraguay

Paraguayan guaraní

CB

2024

Peru

Peruvian sol

CB

2024

Philippines

Philippine peso

NSO

Poland

Polish zloty

Portugal

Country

Currency

Historical Data
Source1

Nicaragua

Nicaraguan córdoba

Niger

CFA franc

Nigeria

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

Historical Data
Source1

From 2006

From 1980

Latest Actual
Annual Data

NSO

2024

NSO

2024/25

MoF

2023/24

NSO

2024

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

2014

SNA 2008

CB

2024

2007

SNA 2008

CB

2024

2024

2018

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 2020

NSO

2024

Euro

NSO

2024

2021

ESA 2010

From 1995

NSO

2024

Puerto Rico

US dollar

NSO

2023/24

2017

...

NSO

2024

Qatar

Qatari riyal

NSO

2023

2018

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

Romania

Romanian leu

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 2000

NSO

2024

Russia

Russian ruble

NSO

2024

2021

SNA 2008

From 1995

NSO

2024

Rwanda

Rwandan franc

NSO

2024

2017

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Samoa

Samoan tala

NSO

2023/24

2012/13

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

San Marino

Euro

NSO

2022

2007

ESA 2010

NSO

2023

São Tomé and Príncipe São Tomé and
Príncipe dobra

NSO

2023

2008

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Saudi Arabia

Saudi riyal

NSO

2024

2023

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Senegal

CFA franc

NSO

2024

2014

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Serbia

Serbian dinar

NSO

2024

2021

ESA 2010

NSO

2024

Seychelles

Seychelles rupee

NSO

2023

2014

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Sierra Leone

Sierra Leonean leone

NSO

2024

2018

SNA 2008

From 2010

NSO

2024

Singapore

Singapore dollar

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

From 2015

NSO

2024

Slovak Republic

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

From 1997

NSO

2024

Slovenia

Euro

NSO

2024

2010

ESA 2010

From 2000

NSO

2024

Solomon Islands

Solomon Islands
dollar

Other

2022

2012

SNA 1993

CB

2024

Somalia

US dollar

NSO

2022

2022

SNA 2008

NSO

2023

South Africa

South African rand

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

South Sudan

South Sudanese
pound

IMF staff

2024

2010

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Spain

Euro

NSO

2024

2020

ESA 2010

Other

2024

Sri Lanka

Sri Lankan rupee

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

St. Kitts and Nevis

Eastern Caribbean
dollar

NSO

2023

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

From 2016
From 2018

From 2024
From 2021

From 1995

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

115

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Balance of Payments
Subsectors Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Country

Historical Data
Source1

Nicaragua

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Niger

MoF

2024

1986

CG

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Nigeria

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

North Macedonia

MoF

2024

1986

CG,SG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Norway

Other

2023

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Oman

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Pakistan

MoF

2024/25

1986

CG,SG,LG

C

CB

2024/25

BPM 6

Palau

MoF

2023/24

2001

CG

A

MoF

2022/23

BPM 6

Panama

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG,SS

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Papua New Guinea

MoF

2022

2014

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Paraguay

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Peru

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 5

Philippines

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Poland

MoF

2024

ESA 2010

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Portugal

NSO

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Puerto Rico

Other

2023/24

2001

CG

A

...

...

...

Qatar

MoF

2023

1986

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

Romania

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Russia

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,SS

...

CB

2024

BPM 6

Rwanda

MoF

2023/24

2014

CG

...

CB

2024

BPM 6

Samoa

MoF

2023/24

2001

CG

A

CB

2023/24

BPM 6

San Marino

MoF

2022

2001

CG

A

Other

2022

BPM 6

São Tomé and
Príncipe

MoF

2023

1986

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

Saudi Arabia

MoF

2024

2014

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Senegal

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB and IMF staff

2024

BPM 6

Serbia

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Seychelles

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Sierra Leone

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Singapore

NSO

2024/25

2014

CG

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Slovak Republic

Other

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Slovenia

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Solomon Islands

CB

2022

2014

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Somalia

MoF

2023

2001

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 5

South Africa

MoF

2024/25

2001

CG,SG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

South Sudan

MoF

2024

2014

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Spain

MoF

2024

ESA 2010

CG,SG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Sri Lanka

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

St. Kitts and Nevis

MoF

2024

1986

CG,SG,LG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

116

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
National Accounts

Prices (CPI)

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Base Year2

System of
National
Accounts

NSO

2024

2018

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Eastern Caribbean
dollar

NSO

2022

2018

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Sudan

Sudanese pound

NSO

2019

1982

...

NSO

2024

Suriname

Surinamese dollar

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2023

Sweden

Swedish krona

NSO

2024

2024

ESA 2010

From 1993

NSO

2024

Switzerland

Swiss franc

NSO

2024

2015

ESA 2010

From 1980

NSO

2024

Syria

Syrian pound

NSO

2010

2000

SNA 1993

NSO

2011

Taiwan Province of
China

New Taiwan dollar

NSO

2024

2021

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Tajikistan

Tajik somoni

NSO

2023

1995

SNA 1993

NSO

2023

Tanzania

Tanzanian shilling

NSO

2023

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2023

Thailand

Thai baht

Other

2024

2002

SNA 1993

MOC

2024

Timor-Leste

US dollar

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Togo

CFA franc

NSO

2022

2016

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Tonga

Tongan pa’anga

CB

2022/23

2016/17

SNA 2008

CB

2024/25

Trinidad and Tobago

Trinidad and Tobago
dollar

NSO

2023

2012

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Tunisia

Tunisian dinar

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

From 2009

NSO

2024

Türkiye

Turkish lira

NSO

2024

2009

ESA 2010

From 2009

NSO

2024

Turkmenistan

New Turkmen manat

IMF staff

2024

2023

SNA 2008

From 2007

NSO

2024

Tuvalu

Australian dollar

Other

2024

2016

SNA 2008

Other

2024

Uganda

Ugandan shilling

NSO

2024

2016

SNA 2008

CB

2024

Ukraine

Ukrainian hryvnia

NSO

2024

2021

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

United Arab Emirates

U.A.E. dirham

NSO

2023

2010

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

United Kingdom

British pound

NSO

2024

2022

ESA 2010

From 1980

NSO

2024

United States

US dollar

NSO

2024

2017

SNA 2008

From 1980

NSO

2024

Uruguay

Uruguayan peso

CB

2024

2016

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Uzbekistan

Uzbek som

NSO

2024

2020

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Vanuatu

Vanuatu vatu

NSO

2022

2006

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

Venezuela

Venezuelan bolívar

CB

2018

1997

SNA 1993

CB

2023

Vietnam

Vietnamese dong

NSO

2024

2010

SNA 1993

NSO

2024

West Bank and Gaza

Israeli new shekel

NSO

2024

2015

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Yemen

Yemeni rial

IMF staff

2022

1990

SNA 1993

IMF staff

2022

Zambia

Zambian kwacha

NSO

2024

2010

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Zimbabwe

Zimbabwe gold

NSO

2023

2023

SNA 2008

NSO

2024

Country

Currency

St. Lucia

Eastern Caribbean
dollar

St. Vincent and the
Grenadines

Historical Data
Source1

Use of ChainWeighted
Methodology3

From 1993

From 2005

Historical Data
Source1

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

Latest Actual
Annual Data

117

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table G. Key Data Documentation (continued)
Government Finance
Country

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

Balance of Payments
Subsectors Coverage4

Accounting
Practice5

Historical Data
Source1

Latest Actual
Annual Data

Statistics
Manual in Use
at Source

St. Lucia

MoF

2024/25

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

St. Vincent and the
Grenadines

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Sudan

MoF

2021

2001

CG

Mixed

CB

2021

BPM 6

Suriname

MoF

2023

1986

CG

Mixed

CB

2023

BPM 6

Sweden

MoF

2024

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Switzerland

MoF

2024

2001

CG,SG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Syria

MoF

2009

1986

CG

C

CB

2009

BPM 5

Taiwan Province of
China

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Tajikistan

MoF

2023

1986

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

Tanzania

MoF

2023

1986

CG,LG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

Thailand

MoF

2023/24

2014

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Timor-Leste

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Togo

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2023

BPM 6

Tonga

MoF

2023/24

2014

CG

C

CB

2023/24

BPM 6

Trinidad and Tobago

MoF

2023/24

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Tunisia

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Türkiye

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

A

CB

2024

BPM 6

Turkmenistan

MoF

2024

1986

CG,LG

C

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Tuvalu

MoF

2024

...

CG

C

IMF staff

2023

BPM 6

Uganda

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Ukraine

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

United Arab Emirates

MoF

2023

2014

CG,SG,SS

Mixed

CB

2023

BPM 6

United Kingdom

NSO

2024

2014

CG,LG

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

United States

MEP

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG

A

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Uruguay

MoF

2024

1986

CG,LG,SS

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Uzbekistan

MoF

2024

2014

CG,SG,LG,SS

C

CB and MEP

2024

BPM 6

Vanuatu

MoF

2024

2001

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Venezuela

MoF

2017

2001

NFPC,other

C

CB

2018

BPM 6

Vietnam

MoF

2023

2001

CG,SG,LG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

West Bank and Gaza

MoF

2024

2001

CG

Mixed

NSO

2024

BPM 6

Yemen

MoF

2024

2001

CG,LG

C

IMF staff

2022

BPM 5

Zambia

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB

2024

BPM 6

Zimbabwe

MoF

2024

1986

CG

C

CB and MoF

2023

BPM 6

Note: BPM = Balance of Payments Manual; CFA = Communaute Financière Africaine (African Financial Community); CPI = consumer price index; ESA = European System of National
Accounts; SAR = Special Administrative Region; SNA = System of National Accounts.
1 CB = central bank; GAD = General Administration Department; MEP = Ministry of Economy, Planning, Commerce, and/or Development; MOC = Ministry of Commerce; MoF = Ministry
of Finance and/or Treasury; NSO = National Statistics Office.
2 National accounts base year is the period with which other periods are compared and the period for which prices appear in the denominators of the price relationships used to calculate
the index.
3 Use of chain-weighted methodology allows countries to measure GDP growth more accurately by reducing or eliminating the downward biases in volume series built on index numbers
that average volume components using weights from a year in the moderately distant past.
4 CG = central government; LG = local government; MPC = monetary public corporation, including central bank; NFPC = nonfinancial public corporation; SG = state government;
SS = social security fund.
5 Accounting standard: A = accrual accounting; C = cash accounting; CB = commitments basis accounting; Mixed = combination of accrual and cash accounting.
6 Base year deflator is not equal to 100 because the nominal GDP is not measured in the same way as real GDP or the data are seasonally adjusted.

118

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1. Economic Policy Assumptions underlying the Projections for
Selected Economies
Fiscal Policy Assumptions
The short-term fiscal policy assumptions used in
the World Economic Outlook (WEO) are normally
based on officially announced budgets, adjusted for
differences between the national authorities and the
IMF staff regarding macroeconomic assumptions
and projected fiscal outturns. When no official budget has been announced, projections incorporate
policy measures judged likely to be implemented.
The medium-term fiscal projections are similarly
based on a judgment about policies’ most likely
path. For cases in which the IMF staff has insufficient information to assess the authorities’ budget
intentions and prospects for policy implementation,
an unchanged structural primary balance is assumed
unless indicated otherwise. Specific assumptions
used in regard to selected economies follow. (See
also Tables B5 through B9 in the online section
of the Statistical Appendix for data on fiscal net
lending/borrowing and structural balances.)1
Argentina: Fiscal projections are based on the available information regarding budget outturn, budget
plans, and IMF-supported program targets for the
federal government; on fiscal measures announced
by the authorities; and on the IMF staff ’s macroeconomic projections. The interest bill excludes interest
payments of zero-coupon bonds issued prior to
September 2025, which are recorded below the line.
Australia: Fiscal projections are based on
data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics,
the FY2025/26 budgets published by the
Commonwealth Government and the FY2024/25
1The output gap is actual minus potential output, as a
percentage of potential output. Structural balances are expressed
as a percentage of potential output. The structural balance is the
actual net lending/borrowing minus the effects of cyclical output
from potential output, corrected for one-time and other factors,
such as asset and commodity prices and output composition
effects. Changes in the structural balance consequently include
effects of temporary fiscal measures, the impact of fluctuations in
interest rates and debt-service costs, and other noncyclical fluctuations in net lending/borrowing. The computations of structural
balances are based on the IMF staff ’s estimates of potential GDP
and revenue and expenditure elasticities. (See Annex I of the
October 1993 World Economic Outlook.) Estimates of the output
gap and of the structural balance are subject to significant margins of uncertainty. Net debt is calculated as gross debt minus
financial assets corresponding to debt instruments.

budgets published by the state/territory governments, and the IMF staff ’s estimates and
projections.
Austria: The IMF staff ’s fiscal projections are
based on the authorities’ latest medium-term plans,
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff ’s macroeconomic
assumptions and assuming some moderate expenditure restraint over the medium term in line with
historical patterns.
Belgium: Projections are based on the Budgetary
Plan 2025, the Belgian Monitoring Committee’s
reports, and other available information on the
authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the
IMF staff ’s assumptions.
Brazil: Fiscal projections reflect current and
expected policies.
Canada: Projections use the baseline forecasts
from the Government of Canada’s 2024 Fall Economic Statement and the latest provincial budget
updates. The IMF staff makes some adjustments
to these forecasts, including those for differences
in macroeconomic projections. The IMF staff ’s
forecast also incorporates the most recent data
releases from Statistics Canada’s National Economic
Accounts, including quarterly federal, provincial,
and territorial budgetary outturns.
Chile: Fiscal projections are based on the authorities’ budget projections, adjusted to reflect the IMF
staff ’s macroeconomic projections.
China: The IMF staff ’s fiscal projections incorporate the 2025 budget as well as estimates of
off-budget financing.
Colombia: Fiscal projections are based on the
authorities’ policies and projections reflected in
the 2025–36 Medium-Term Fiscal Framework,
adjusted to reflect the IMF staff ’s macroeconomic
assumptions.
Denmark: Estimates for the current year are
aligned with the latest official budget numbers,
adjusted where appropriate for the IMF staff ’s
macroeconomic assumptions. Beyond the current
year, the projections incorporate key features of
the medium-term fiscal plan as embodied in the
authorities’ latest budget. Structural balances are
net of temporary fluctuations in some revenues
(for example, North Sea revenue, pension yield tax

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

119

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box A1 (continued)
revenue) and one-offs (COVID-19–related one-offs
are, however, included).
France: Projections for 2025 onward are based
on the 2025 budget and other clearly specified
measures in the authorities’ 2023–27 multiannual
budget programming bill and fiscal plans, adjusted
for differences in revenue projections and assumptions on macroeconomic and financial variables.
Germany: Fiscal projections are based on the
IMF staff ’s macroeconomic framework and assume
a gradual increase in infrastructure and defense
spending over the medium term, in line with the
authorities’ stated intentions. The projections also
assume that additional fiscal room generated by
reforms to Germany’s fiscal rule (the “debt brake”)
in March 2025 is mostly used.
Greece: Data since 2010 reflect adjustments in
line with the primary balance definition under the
enhanced surveillance framework for Greece.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Projections are based on the authorities’ medium-term
fiscal projections for expenditures.
Hungary: Fiscal projections include the IMF
staff ’s projections for the macroeconomic framework and fiscal policy plans announced in the 2025
budget.
India: Projections are based on available information on the authorities’ fiscal plans, with adjustments for the IMF staff ’s assumptions. General
government data cover only central and state governments. State government data are incorporated
with a lag of up to two years; general government
data are thus finalized well after central government
data. IMF and Indian presentations differ, particularly regarding disinvestment and license auction
proceeds, net versus gross recording of revenues in
certain minor categories, and some public sector
lending. Starting with FY2020/21 data, expenditure
also includes the off-budget component of food
subsidies, consistent with the revised treatment
of food subsidies in the budget. In FY2020/21
the IMF staff adjusted expenditure to take out
payments for FY2019/20 food subsidies, which
FY2020/21 official figures include.
Indonesia: The IMF staff ’s projections are based
on the latest budget, extrapolating using projected
nominal GDP (and its components as needed) with

120

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

application of judgment to reflect the authorities’
spending and revenue policies over the medium
term.
Ireland: Fiscal projections are based on the country’s Budget 2025.
Israel: Projections are subject to significant risks
given the unpredictability of the current conflict
and its impact on the economy. Fiscal projections
are for the general government and take the 2025
budget into account.
Italy: The IMF staff ’s estimates and projections
are informed by the fiscal plans included in the
government’s Medium-Term Fiscal–Structural
2025–2029 Plan and the updated national
accounts. The stock of maturing postal bonds is
included in the debt projections.
Japan: The projections reflect fiscal measures the
government has already announced, with adjustments for the IMF staff ’s assumptions.
Korea: The forecast incorporates the authorities’
annual budget, any supplementary budget, any
proposed new budget, the medium-term fiscal plan,
and the IMF staff ’s estimates.
Mexico: The 2020 public sector borrowing
requirements estimated by the IMF staff adjust for
some statistical discrepancies between above-the-line
and below-the-line numbers. Fiscal projections for
2025 are informed by the estimates in Pre-Criterios
2025; projections for 2025 onward assume continued compliance with rules established in the Federal
Budget and Fiscal Responsibility Law.
The Netherlands: Fiscal projections for 2025–30
are based on the IMF staff ’s forecast framework and
are also informed by the authorities’ 2025 budget,
the 2025 Spring Memorandum, and Bureau for
Economic Policy Analysis projections.
New Zealand: Fiscal projections are based on the
country’s Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update
2024 and Budget Policy Statement 2025.
Portugal: The projections for the current year are
based on the authorities’ approved budget, adjusted
to reflect the IMF staff ’s macroeconomic forecast.
Projections thereafter are based on the assumption
of unchanged policies. Projections for 2025 reflect
information available in the 2025 budget proposal.
Puerto Rico: Fiscal projections are informed by
the Certified Fiscal Plan for the Commonwealth of

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Box A1 (continued)
Puerto Rico, which was prepared in October 2024,
certified by the Financial Oversight and Management Board.
Russia: The fiscal rule was suspended in March
2022 by the government in response to the
sanctions imposed after the invasion of Ukraine,
allowing for windfall oil and gas revenues above
benchmark to be used to finance a larger deficit in
2022 as well as savings accumulated in the Russian
National Welfare Fund. The 2023–25 budget was
based on a modified rule with a two-year transition
period that set the benchmark oil and gas revenues
fixed in rubles at Rub 8 trillion, compared with
a fixed benchmark oil price at $40 a barrel under
the 2019 fiscal rule. During the transition period
higher deficits than prescribed by the rule were
allowed, with additional financing coming from
earlier saved windfall revenues. However, in late
September 2023, the Ministry of Finance proposed
reverting to the earlier version of the fiscal rule
from 2024 onward to determine the price of oil
and gas revenues but set the benchmark oil price
at $60 a barrel. The new rule, effective in the 2025
budget, allows higher oil and gas revenues to be
spent, but it simultaneously targets a smaller primary structural deficit.
Saudi Arabia: The IMF staff ’s baseline fiscal
projections are based primarily on its understanding of government policies as outlined in the
2025 budget and recent official announcements.
Export oil revenues are based on WEO baseline
oil price assumptions and the IMF staff ’s understanding of oil production adjustments under the
OPEC+ (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries, including Russia and other non-OPEC
oil exporters) agreement and those unilaterally
announced by Saudi Arabia.
Singapore: FY2024 projections are revised figures
based on budget execution through the end of
2024. FY2025 projections are based on the initial
budget of February 18, 2025.
South Africa: Fiscal assumptions are informed
by the 2025 budget. Nontax revenue excludes
transactions in financial assets and liabilities, as
they involve primarily revenues associated with
the realized exchange rate valuation gains from the
holding of foreign currency deposits, sale of assets,

and conceptually similar items. Eskom debt relief is
treated as a capital transfer above-the-line item.
Spain: Figures for 2021–28 reflect disbursements
of grants and loans under the EU Recovery and
Resilience Facility.
Sweden: Fiscal estimates for 2024 are based on
the authorities’ budget bill and have been updated
with the authorities’ latest interim forecast. The
impact of cyclical developments on the fiscal
accounts is calculated using the 2014 OECD study
to take into account output gaps.
Switzerland: The projections assume that fiscal policy is adjusted as necessary to keep fiscal balances in
line with the requirements of Switzerland’s fiscal rules.
Türkiye: The basis for the projections is the
IMF-defined fiscal balance, which excludes some
revenue and expenditure items that are included in
the authorities’ headline balance.
United Kingdom: Fiscal projections are based on
the March 2025 forecast of the Office for Budget
Responsibility and the January 2025 release on public sector finances from the Office for National Statistics. The IMF staff ’s projections take the Office
for Budget Responsibility forecast as a reference and
overlay adjustments for differences in assumptions.
Data are presented on a calendar year basis.
United States: Fiscal projections are based on the
January 2025 Congressional Budget Office baseline,
adjusted for the IMF staff ’s policy and macroeconomic assumptions. Projections incorporate the
effects of the One Big Beautiful Bill Act signed on
July 4, 2025.
Monetary Policy Assumptions
Monetary policy assumptions are based on the
established policy framework in each economy.
In most cases, this implies a nonaccommodative
stance over the business cycle: Official interest rates
will increase when economic indicators suggest
that inflation will rise above its acceptable rate or
range; they will decrease when indicators suggest
that inflation will not exceed the acceptable rate
or range, that output growth is below its potential
rate, and that the margin of slack in the economy is
significant. With regard to interest rates, please refer
to the “Assumptions” section at the beginning of
the Statistical Appendix.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

121

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Box A1 (continued)
Argentina: Monetary projections are consistent
with the overall macroeconomic framework, the
fiscal and financing plans, and the monetary and
foreign exchange policies.
Australia: Monetary policy assumptions are
based on the IMF staff ’s analysis and the expected
inflation path.
Brazil: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with the convergence of inflation to target.
Canada: Projections reflect the gradual unwinding of monetary policy tightening by the Bank of
Canada as inflation slowly returns to its midrange
target of 2 percent by the end of 2026.
Chile: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with attaining the inflation target.
China: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with inflation gradually rising and the output
gap closing over the medium term.
Denmark: Monetary policy is to maintain the peg
to the euro.
Euro area: Monetary policy assumptions for euro
area member countries are drawn from a suite of
models (semi-structural, DSGE [dynamic stochastic
general equilibrium], Taylor rule), market expectations, and European Central Bank Governing
Council communications.
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: The
IMF staff assumes that the currency board system
will remain intact.
Hungary: The IMF staff ’s estimates and projections are informed by expert judgment based on
recent developments.
India: Monetary policy projections are consistent
with achieving the Reserve Bank of India’s inflation
target over the medium term.
Indonesia: Monetary policy assumptions are in
line with inflation within the central bank’s target
band over the medium term.
Israel: Monetary policy assumptions are based on
the gradual normalization of monetary policy.
Japan: Monetary policy assumptions are based on
the IMF staff ’s assessment of the most likely path

122

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

for interest rates, considering the broader macroeconomic outlook, the Bank of Japan’s communications, and market expectations.
Korea: Projections assume that the policy rate
will evolve in line with the Bank of Korea’s forward
guidance.
Mexico: Monetary policy assumptions are consistent with inflation converging to the central bank’s
target over the projection period.
New Zealand: Monetary projections are based on
the IMF staff ’s analysis and expected inflation path.
Russia: Monetary policy projections assume
that the Central Bank of the Russian Federation is
adopting a tight monetary policy stance.
Saudi Arabia: Monetary policy projections are
based on the continuation of the exchange rate peg
to the US dollar.
Singapore: Broad money is projected to grow in
line with the projected growth in nominal GDP.
South Africa: Monetary policy assumptions are
consistent with maintaining inflation within the
3–6 percent target band over the medium term.
Sweden: Monetary policy assumptions are based
on the IMF staff ’s estimates.
Switzerland: Monetary policy assumptions are
based on the IMF staff ’s assessment of the most
likely path for interest rates, considering the broader
macroeconomic outlook, the Swiss National Bank’s
inflation forecasts, and market expectations.
Türkiye: The baseline assumes that the monetary
policy stance will remain contractionary in line
with announced and observed policies.
United Kingdom: Monetary policy assumptions
are based on the IMF staff ’s assessment of the
most likely path for interest rates, considering the
broader macroeconomic outlook, model results, the
Bank of England’s inflation forecasts and communications, and market expectations.
United States: The IMF staff expects the Federal
Open Market Committee to continue to adjust the
federal funds target rate in line with the broader
macroeconomic outlook.

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

List of Tables1
Output
A1. Summary of World Output
A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand
A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP

Inflation
A5. Summary of Inflation
A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices
A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices

Financial Policies
A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt

Foreign Trade
A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices

Current Account Transactions
A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance

Balance of Payments and External Financing
A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances

Flow of Funds
A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing

Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario

1When countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

123

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A1. Summary of World Output1
(Annual percent change)

Average

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

3.4

3.8

3.6

3.0

–2.7

6.6

3.8

3.5

3.3

3.2

3.1

3.1

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies2

1.3
1.5
0.7
0.4
2.2

2.6
2.5
2.6
1.7
3.1

2.3
3.0
1.8
0.6
2.5

1.9
2.6
1.6
–0.4
1.9

–3.9
–2.1
–6.0
–4.2
–3.9

6.0
6.2
6.4
2.7
6.5

3.0
2.5
3.6
1.0
3.4

1.7
2.9
0.4
1.2
1.5

1.8
2.8
0.9
0.1
2.0

1.6
2.0
1.2
1.1
1.6

1.6
2.1
1.1
0.6
1.8

1.5
1.8
1.1
0.5
1.9

Emerging Market and Developing
Economies

5.3

4.8

4.6

3.8

–1.8

7.0

4.3

4.7

4.3

4.2

4.0

4.0

7.6
2.6
2.4
4.1
4.8

6.6
4.3
1.4
2.6
2.8

6.4
3.8
1.1
2.5
3.2

5.4
2.6
0.2
2.1
3.1

–0.5
–1.8
–6.9
–2.3
–3.1

7.8
7.2
7.4
4.7
3.8

4.7
0.5
4.3
6.4
4.4

6.1
3.6
2.4
2.6
3.7

5.3
3.5
2.4
2.6
4.1

5.2
1.8
2.4
3.5
4.1

4.7
2.2
2.3
3.8
4.4

4.5
2.4
2.6
3.7
4.6

By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products

4.0
5.5
3.8

0.8
5.3
2.8

0.7
5.2
3.1

0.6
4.2
1.7

–4.6
–1.5
–4.9

4.1
7.4
6.5

6.5
4.0
2.8

2.9
4.9
1.4

3.1
4.5
2.2

3.3
4.3
3.1

3.6
4.1
3.2

3.2
4.0
3.3

By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies

4.5

4.7

4.5

3.3

–3.8

6.9

5.1

5.0

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.8

Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2020–24

3.7

4.0

3.6

3.2

–0.7

3.8

0.9

3.2

2.9

4.0

4.4

4.8

World

Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups

Other Groups
European Union
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income
Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

0.9
3.9

3.0
2.1

2.3
1.8

2.0
1.5

–5.5
–2.5

6.4
4.4

3.7
6.7

0.6
2.5

1.1
2.1

1.4
3.3

1.4
3.7

1.4
3.6

5.3
5.5

4.8
4.2

4.7
4.5

3.7
4.7

–1.9
–1.5

7.3
3.8

4.2
4.9

4.8
4.2

4.3
4.2

4.1
4.4

3.9
5.0

3.8
5.3

Memorandum
Median Growth Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

1.5
4.1
3.5
5.0

3.0
3.7
3.1
4.3

2.8
3.5
3.1
4.4

2.1
3.3
2.9
4.6

–4.0
–3.6
–5.4
–1.1

6.5
4.8
5.2
4.8

2.9
4.5
4.5
4.4

1.6
3.6
3.3
4.3

1.5
3.5
3.3
4.2

1.2
3.3
2.9
4.4

1.9
3.6
3.2
4.7

1.8
3.4
2.9
4.7

Output per Capita3
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

0.8
3.6
3.9
2.8

2.2
3.2
3.6
1.7

1.9
3.3
3.7
2.0

1.5
2.5
2.7
2.3

–4.4
–3.2
–2.9
–3.9

5.9
5.9
6.6
1.2

2.4
3.2
3.5
2.6

0.9
3.6
4.0
1.8

1.2
3.2
3.6
1.7

1.2
3.7
3.5
3.9

1.4
3.0
3.3
2.7

1.2
2.9
3.2
3.1

World Growth Rate Based on Market
Exchange Rates

2.4

3.4

3.2

2.6

–3.0

6.4

3.3

2.9

2.8

2.6

2.6

2.4

71,355
96,876

81,952
124,699

87,039
132,666

88,323
140,582

86,051
140,263

98,226
157,045

102,402
174,330

106,940
186,977

111,113
197,913

117,165
208,956

123,585
219,220

149,568
265,663

Value of World Output (billions of US dollars)
At Market Exchange Rates
At Purchasing Power Parities
1 Real GDP.

2 Excludes euro area countries, Japan, and the United States.

3 Output per capita is in international dollars at purchasing power parity.

124

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A2. Advanced Economies: Real GDP and Total Domestic Demand1
(Annual percent change)

Q4 over Q42
Average

Projections

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

2024:Q4

2025:Q4 2026:Q4

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area

1.3
1.5
0.7

2.6
2.5
2.6

2.3
3.0
1.8

1.9
2.6
1.6

–3.9
–2.1
–6.0

6.0
6.2
6.4

3.0
2.5
3.6

1.7
2.9
0.4

1.8
2.8
0.9

1.6
2.0
1.2

1.6
2.1
1.1

1.5
1.8
1.1

1.9
2.4
1.3

1.3
1.9
0.7

1.8
2.0
1.7

Germany
France
Italy
Spain
The Netherlands

1.3
0.8
–0.6
0.4
1.0

2.8
2.3
1.6
2.9
2.8

1.1
1.6
0.8
2.4
2.3

1.0
2.1
0.4
2.0
2.3

–4.1
–7.6
–8.9
–10.9
–3.9

3.9
6.8
8.9
6.7
6.3

1.8
2.8
4.8
6.4
5.0

–0.9
1.6
0.7
2.5
–0.6

–0.5
1.1
0.7
3.5
1.1

0.2
0.7
0.5
2.9
1.4

0.9
0.9
0.8
2.0
1.2

0.7
1.2
0.7
1.6
1.2

–0.2
0.6
0.6
3.7
2.2

0.3
0.8
1.0
2.5
0.8

1.0
1.0
0.1
1.8
1.4

Belgium
Ireland
Austria
Portugal
Greece

1.2
3.3
1.1
–0.1
–2.7

1.5
10.1
2.3
3.3
1.5

1.9
7.7
2.5
2.9
2.1

2.4
5.0
1.8
2.7
2.3

–4.8
7.2
–6.3
–8.2
–9.2

6.2
16.3
4.8
5.6
8.7

4.3
7.5
5.3
7.0
5.7

1.2
–2.5
–1.0
2.6
2.3

1.0
2.6
–1.0
1.9
2.3

1.1
9.1
0.3
1.9
2.0

1.0
1.3
0.8
2.1
2.0

1.3
2.3
0.7
1.7
1.6

1.1
11.9
–0.5
2.8
2.5

1.2
–3.7
0.7
1.7
2.2

1.2
14.1
1.1
1.6
1.5

Finland
Slovak Republic
Croatia
Lithuania
Slovenia

0.3
3.1
0.1
2.1
0.8

3.3
2.9
3.3
4.7
5.2

1.2
4.1
2.9
4.8
4.4

1.3
2.3
3.1
4.7
3.5

–2.5
–2.6
–8.3
0.0
–4.1

2.7
5.7
12.6
6.4
8.4

0.8
0.4
7.3
2.5
2.7

–0.9
2.2
3.3
0.4
2.4

0.4
2.1
3.9
2.7
1.7

0.5
0.9
3.1
2.7
1.1

1.3
1.7
2.7
2.9
2.3

1.2
2.1
2.5
2.5
2.3

1.7
1.4
3.9
3.9
1.0

0.9
1.1
–0.2
2.1
2.5

1.1
1.8
–12.4
3.1
0.8

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta

2.4
0.6
0.9
0.7
4.7

1.3
3.4
5.6
5.8
13.0

1.6
4.3
3.7
6.3
7.2

2.7
0.7
3.7
5.9
4.1

–0.5
–3.5
–2.9
–3.2
–3.5

6.9
6.9
8.3
11.4
13.4

–1.1
1.8
–1.2
7.2
2.5

0.1
2.9
–2.7
2.8
10.6

0.4
–0.4
–0.1
3.4
6.8

1.2
1.0
0.5
2.9
3.9

2.1
2.2
1.5
2.8
3.9

2.1
2.4
1.7
3.0
4.0

0.1
–0.3
–0.4
3.0
5.4

3.8
1.9
1.1
2.9
4.9

0.8
2.0
1.6
3.5
3.8

Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada

0.4
1.2
3.5
1.5

1.7
2.7
3.4
3.0

0.6
1.4
3.2
2.7

–0.4
1.6
2.3
1.9

–4.2
–10.3
–0.7
–5.0

2.7
8.6
4.6
6.0

1.0
4.8
2.7
4.2

1.2
0.4
1.6
1.5

0.1
1.1
2.0
1.6

1.1
1.3
0.9
1.2

0.6
1.3
1.8
1.5

0.5
1.4
1.9
1.6

1.3
1.5
1.1
2.3

0.2
1.4
2.0
0.5

1.1
1.4
1.1
2.3

Australia
Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Switzerland
Sweden

2.8
3.3
5.1
1.8
1.6

2.4
3.7
4.5
1.4
1.9

2.8
2.9
3.5
2.9
1.8

1.9
3.1
1.3
1.2
2.6

–2.0
3.4
–3.8
–2.3
–1.9

5.4
6.7
9.8
5.6
5.2

4.1
2.7
4.1
3.1
1.3

2.1
1.1
1.8
0.7
–0.2

1.0
4.8
4.4
1.4
0.8

1.8
3.7
2.2
0.9
0.7

2.1
2.1
1.8
1.3
1.9

2.3
2.2
2.5
1.8
1.7

1.3
3.3
5.0
1.7
1.9

2.0
–1.6
0.0
0.1
0.3

2.1
7.4
3.1
2.2
3.3

Czech Republic
Norway
Hong Kong SAR
Israel
Denmark

1.6
1.2
3.0
3.9
0.6

5.2
2.5
3.8
4.3
3.1

2.8
0.8
2.8
4.1
1.9

3.6
1.1
–1.7
3.6
1.7

–5.3
–1.3
–6.5
–1.8
–1.8

4.0
3.9
6.5
9.3
6.5

2.8
3.2
–3.7
6.4
0.4

0.0
0.1
3.2
2.1
0.6

1.2
2.1
2.5
1.0
3.5

2.3
1.2
2.4
2.5
1.8

2.0
1.6
2.1
3.9
2.2

2.0
1.3
2.3
3.4
1.5

1.9
–0.2
2.5
5.8
4.2

1.9
4.9
1.5
3.2
1.2

2.3
–0.7
3.8
3.1
1.8

New Zealand
Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
Liechtenstein
Andorra
San Marino

2.2
–1.0
5.4
1.7
0.5
–1.3
–2.3

3.3
–2.9
9.9
3.5
6.4
0.3
0.3

3.5
–4.4
6.4
4.7
3.5
1.6
1.5

3.0
1.7
–2.6
1.1
–2.2
2.0
2.0

–1.3
–4.2
–54.3
–6.6
–5.3
–11.2
–6.8

5.7
0.4
23.5
5.2
18.7
8.3
14.5

2.9
3.0
–19.6
8.8
–5.5
9.6
7.8

1.8
0.5
75.1
5.2
4.8
2.6
0.4

–0.6
3.2
8.8
–1.0
1.5
3.4
0.7

0.8
–0.8
2.6
1.4
1.0
2.4
1.0

2.2
–0.1
2.8
2.3
1.5
1.6
1.3

2.2
0.8
3.0
2.4
2.0
1.5
1.3

–1.3
...
...
–1.8
...
...
...

1.6
...
...
3.6
...
...
...

3.0
...
...
2.4
...
...
...

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

1.1

2.4

2.1

1.7

–4.2

5.9

2.7

1.8

1.7

1.4

1.6

1.4

1.7

1.3

1.5

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies3

1.2
1.4
0.4
1.2
1.0
–0.8
–0.5
0.4
1.5
1.8
2.6

2.6
2.6
2.4
2.8
2.3
1.6
3.1
1.1
2.2
4.1
3.6

2.3
3.1
1.9
2.0
1.4
1.0
3.2
0.6
0.9
2.7
2.7

2.1
2.6
2.3
1.5
2.0
–0.2
1.6
0.0
1.9
1.1
1.7

–3.9
–1.8
–5.7
–3.3
–6.3
–8.3
–9.0
–3.3
–11.5
–6.1
–2.4

6.0
7.2
5.2
3.3
6.0
9.2
7.0
1.7
9.1
7.0
6.1

3.4
2.8
3.9
3.1
2.8
5.5
4.1
1.5
5.1
5.1
3.7

1.1
2.4
0.0
–0.9
0.7
0.2
1.6
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.7

1.9
3.1
0.5
0.2
–0.1
0.4
3.4
0.1
2.4
1.6
2.0

1.9
2.3
1.7
1.5
1.3
0.7
3.2
1.3
1.7
1.9
1.4

1.5
1.8
1.3
1.3
0.7
0.9
2.1
0.8
1.3
1.6
1.8

1.5
1.7
1.1
0.9
1.1
0.6
1.6
0.5
1.4
1.6
2.1

2.5
2.8
1.4
2.4
0.5
1.7
4.1
1.0
4.4
2.2
3.4

1.1
1.8
0.9
0.5
1.1
0.2
2.4
0.8
0.1
1.5
0.4

2.0
1.9
2.2
1.3
1.0
1.4
2.0
1.3
1.8
2.4
2.1

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

1.1

2.4

2.2

1.8

–3.8

6.3

3.2

1.2

1.9

1.9

1.4

1.3

2.4

1.3

1.7

Real GDP

Real Total Domestic Demand

Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.

1 In this and other tables, when countries are not listed alphabetically, they are ordered on the basis of economic size.
2 From the fourth quarter of the preceding year.

3 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

125

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP
(Annual percent change)

Averages

Projections

2007–16

2017–26

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1

1.3
1.7
0.5
0.9
1.1
–0.3
–0.2
0.4
1.5
2.5
2.6

1.7
2.6
1.0
0.8
0.9
0.3
1.5
0.1
0.8
2.2
1.9

2.3
2.6
1.8
1.5
1.6
1.2
3.1
1.1
1.8
3.7
3.0

2.1
2.7
1.4
1.4
1.0
0.5
1.7
0.2
2.0
2.6
2.9

1.6
2.1
1.4
1.7
1.7
0.0
1.1
–0.6
1.1
1.6
2.0

–5.4
–2.5
–7.8
–6.8
–6.5
–10.6
–12.1
–4.4
–13.1
–6.3
–5.3

6.0
8.8
4.6
2.0
5.3
5.8
7.1
0.7
7.2
5.8
4.5

4.2
3.0
5.3
6.5
3.3
5.3
4.9
2.1
7.4
5.5
4.5

1.7
2.6
0.4
–0.7
0.8
0.4
1.8
0.8
0.5
1.9
2.5

1.9
2.9
1.2
0.5
1.0
0.4
3.1
–0.1
0.6
2.4
1.7

1.8
2.5
1.2
1.1
0.3
0.5
3.1
1.0
1.0
2.5
1.8

1.6
1.8
1.2
1.1
0.7
0.5
2.2
0.8
1.3
2.6
1.9

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

1.2

1.7

2.1

1.9

1.5

–5.0

6.3

3.9

1.6

1.8

1.8

1.5

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1

1.2
0.4
1.2
2.3
1.5
–0.4
1.1
1.5
1.1
1.6
2.9

1.9
1.6
1.8
2.1
1.3
0.5
2.4
1.2
2.2
2.6
3.1

0.8
–0.1
1.2
1.6
1.7
0.3
1.0
0.1
0.6
2.1
2.4

1.6
1.4
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.0
2.1
1.0
0.6
3.1
3.5

3.0
3.9
1.9
2.9
1.1
–0.4
2.2
1.9
4.0
1.1
3.8

2.2
3.0
1.2
4.9
–4.4
0.3
3.5
2.4
–6.8
1.3
4.6

3.4
0.5
4.3
3.1
6.6
2.3
3.6
3.4
14.3
5.6
4.6

0.6
–1.3
1.3
0.6
2.7
0.8
0.8
1.4
0.6
3.2
2.8

1.9
3.0
1.5
–0.2
1.5
0.6
4.5
–0.3
1.6
2.2
1.6

2.7
3.3
2.3
2.6
1.4
1.1
2.9
0.9
3.0
3.7
3.2

1.6
0.9
1.6
2.1
1.2
0.1
1.6
0.3
3.6
4.0
2.5

1.3
1.1
1.4
2.5
0.9
–0.3
1.7
1.2
1.4
0.1
1.8

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

0.9

1.6

0.4

1.2

2.9

1.6

3.0

0.0

1.8

2.6

1.3

1.2

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1

0.8
1.2
–0.3
1.5
0.2
–2.8
–3.1
–0.3
1.6
0.6
2.5

2.3
3.2
1.7
0.0
1.4
4.2
3.2
0.2
1.3
1.4
2.1

4.0
4.3
3.9
2.6
4.1
3.3
6.8
1.6
3.5
3.3
4.8

3.3
5.0
3.2
3.6
3.4
3.3
6.5
0.6
–0.5
2.4
2.2

3.2
2.9
7.1
2.0
4.2
1.6
4.9
0.5
2.1
0.8
0.9

–3.0
–0.8
–5.7
–3.0
–6.2
–7.1
–8.9
–3.7
–9.7
–3.8
–1.0

6.1
5.6
3.8
0.8
9.6
21.5
2.6
0.5
7.6
8.8
9.2

2.0
1.9
1.9
–0.1
–0.2
7.4
4.2
–0.4
5.1
–1.2
2.5

2.2
3.8
1.7
–2.0
0.8
9.0
5.9
0.9
0.3
–1.6
0.1

1.1
3.5
–2.0
–3.3
–1.3
0.5
3.6
0.0
1.5
0.1
1.0

2.2
3.1
1.9
–1.1
–0.5
2.5
5.0
1.5
1.4
2.7
0.4

2.1
2.8
1.7
1.0
0.3
2.8
2.1
0.5
2.3
3.2
1.6

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

0.7

2.2

3.6

3.5

2.4

–3.0

6.1

1.7

2.4

1.5

2.0

2.2

Private Consumer Expenditure

Public Consumption

Gross Fixed Capital Formation

126

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A3. Advanced Economies: Components of Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Averages

Projections

2007–16

2017–26

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1

1.2
1.4
0.5
1.3
1.0
–0.8
–0.6
0.4
1.4
1.9
2.6

1.9
2.6
1.3
0.9
1.1
1.1
2.0
0.4
1.2
2.0
2.1

2.4
2.6
2.1
1.8
2.2
1.4
3.4
1.0
1.9
3.3
3.4

2.2
3.0
1.7
1.8
1.5
0.9
2.7
0.5
1.3
2.7
2.4

2.3
2.5
2.7
2.0
2.1
0.2
2.1
0.2
1.8
1.3
1.9

–3.5
–1.4
–5.3
–3.4
–5.9
–7.8
–8.4
–2.9
–11.3
–4.1
–2.3

5.6
6.9
4.3
2.0
6.6
8.0
5.4
1.3
8.7
6.4
5.7

3.0
2.2
3.6
3.6
2.3
4.8
3.9
1.3
5.5
3.3
3.6

1.8
2.9
1.0
–0.9
1.0
2.3
3.2
0.6
0.7
1.1
1.5

1.8
3.1
0.7
0.2
0.6
0.6
3.1
0.2
1.3
2.1
1.8

1.9
2.4
1.4
0.9
0.4
0.9
3.2
1.1
1.6
2.3
1.5

1.7
2.0
1.3
1.4
0.7
0.9
2.1
1.0
1.5
1.6
1.8

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

1.1

1.8

2.2

2.2

1.9

–3.4

5.8

2.7

1.8

1.9

1.8

1.6

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1

0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
–0.1
–0.1

0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0

0.2
0.0
0.3
1.0
0.1
0.2
–0.2
0.1
0.4
0.9
0.2

0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
–0.1
0.1
0.4
0.2
–0.5
0.0
0.2

–0.1
0.1
–0.4
–0.5
0.0
–0.4
–0.4
–0.1
0.0
–0.2
–0.1

–0.3
–0.5
–0.3
0.1
–0.4
–0.5
–0.6
–0.5
0.0
–0.7
–0.1

0.5
0.3
0.8
1.2
–0.6
1.1
1.7
0.5
0.0
1.1
0.4

0.5
0.6
0.4
–0.4
0.5
0.7
0.3
0.2
0.8
1.8
0.3

–0.7
–0.4
–0.9
0.0
–0.2
–2.0
–1.8
–0.3
–0.9
–1.2
–0.7

0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.0
–0.7
–0.1
0.7
–0.1
0.2
–0.4
0.0

0.0
–0.1
0.3
0.6
1.0
–0.2
0.1
0.3
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1

–0.1
–0.2
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.1

–0.1

–0.4

0.4

0.5

–0.5

–0.1

0.1

–0.1

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies1

0.2
0.1
0.3
0.2
–0.2
0.2
1.0
0.0
–0.3
–0.4
0.4

0.0
–0.2
0.1
–0.4
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
–0.2
0.3

0.1
–0.2
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.1
–0.1
0.6
1.0
–1.1
–0.1

–0.1
–0.3
–0.1
–0.6
0.2
–0.1
–0.7
0.0
–0.1
0.0
0.4

–0.2
–0.1
–0.6
–0.4
0.0
0.7
0.3
–0.5
–0.3
0.8
0.5

–0.2
–0.2
–0.6
–1.1
–1.3
–0.9
–2.2
–0.9
1.8
0.3
0.4

0.0
–1.3
1.4
0.8
0.7
0.0
–0.3
1.1
–0.9
–1.7
0.4

–0.4
–0.4
–0.1
–1.1
–0.1
–0.5
2.5
–0.5
–0.3
–1.0
–0.7

0.6
0.5
0.4
–0.1
0.9
0.5
1.1
0.8
0.3
1.6
1.1

0.0
–0.4
0.4
–0.7
1.2
0.3
0.3
0.0
–1.3
–0.1
0.6

–0.2
–0.4
–0.4
–1.3
–0.7
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.4
–0.8
0.5

0.1
0.3
–0.1
–0.3
0.2
–0.1
–0.1
–0.2
–0.1
–0.1
0.4

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

0.1

–0.2

0.0

–0.2

–0.1

–0.4

–0.5

–0.5

0.5

–0.3

–0.5

0.1

Final Domestic Demand

Stock Building2

Foreign Balance2

1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.
2 Changes expressed as percent of GDP in the preceding period.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

127

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP
(Annual percent change)

Average

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China

7.6
6.2
7.4
–1.0
7.3
9.0

6.6
6.6
5.9
1.3
8.1
6.9

6.4
7.3
3.5
0.1
8.8
6.8

5.4
7.9
4.6
3.9
7.9
6.1

–0.5
3.4
–2.5
1.1
–3.6
2.3

7.8
6.9
–3.3
–1.6
3.1
8.6

4.7
7.1
4.8
–1.6
5.1
3.1

6.1
5.8
5.0
1.1
5.0
5.4

5.3
4.2
4.2
4.1
6.0
5.0

5.2
3.8
6.8
1.8
4.8
4.8

4.7
4.9
7.4
2.4
4.0
4.2

4.5
6.5
6.5
2.9
5.5
3.4

Fiji
India1
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.

2.3
6.8
5.8
3.7
7.7

5.4
6.8
5.1
3.7
6.9

3.8
6.5
5.2
3.5
6.2

7.6
3.9
5.0
3.3
4.7

–17.2
–5.8
–2.1
–1.5
–0.4

–4.4
9.7
3.7
8.5
2.1

17.7
7.6
5.3
4.6
2.3

9.4
9.2
5.0
2.7
3.7

3.5
6.5
5.0
5.3
4.3

3.2
6.6
4.9
3.9
3.5

3.1
6.2
4.9
3.2
2.5

3.2
6.5
5.1
2.1
2.5

Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia

4.8
5.0
1.0
0.0
7.4

5.8
7.1
3.6
2.3
5.6

4.8
8.7
5.5
0.5
7.7

4.4
7.3
10.5
3.4
5.6

–5.5
–32.9
–2.8
–2.0
–4.6

3.3
37.5
1.2
3.1
1.6

9.0
13.8
–1.1
–2.9
5.0

3.5
4.9
–4.0
0.5
7.4

5.1
3.3
3.0
0.7
5.1

4.5
4.8
2.5
1.0
5.5

4.0
4.5
4.1
1.4
5.5

4.0
4.0
1.6
0.7
5.0

Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea

7.0
5.0
4.1
0.5
5.9

6.1
–6.0
9.0
–3.4
3.5

6.3
–1.2
7.6
–0.4
–0.3

6.6
8.5
6.7
0.3
4.5

–9.0
2.0
–2.4
–6.0
–3.2

–12.0
7.2
4.8
–11.9
–0.5

4.0
3.0
5.6
–0.5
5.7

1.0
0.6
2.0
1.2
3.8

–1.1
1.6
3.7
12.0
3.8

–2.7
2.1
4.3
4.5
4.7

3.0
1.9
5.2
3.3
3.5

1.8
1.8
5.0
2.2
3.1

Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka1
Thailand

5.7
1.8
4.3
6.1
3.2

6.9
1.4
3.1
6.5
4.2

6.3
–0.6
2.7
2.3
4.2

6.1
4.5
1.7
–0.2
2.1

–9.5
–3.1
–3.4
–4.6
–6.1

5.7
–5.1
2.6
4.2
1.5

7.6
2.3
2.4
–7.3
2.6

5.5
15.2
2.7
–2.3
2.0

5.7
4.6
2.5
5.0
2.5

5.4
2.7
2.7
...
2.0

5.7
3.2
2.8
...
1.6

6.0
2.0
3.0
...
2.5

Timor-Leste1
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam

6.5
1.5
2.9
2.7
6.2

–3.2
3.2
3.3
4.4
6.9

–0.5
0.7
1.7
2.9
7.5

2.7
–0.2
13.4
3.2
7.4

–8.5
1.8
–3.3
–5.0
2.9

3.0
0.4
0.1
–1.6
2.6

4.0
–2.3
–11.8
5.2
8.5

2.4
2.1
4.0
2.1
5.1

4.1
2.1
3.1
0.9
7.1

3.9
2.7
3.0
1.7
6.5

3.3
2.3
2.6
2.8
5.6

3.2
1.2
1.8
2.3
5.3

Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Hungary

2.6
3.3
3.0
2.0
2.0
0.8

4.3
3.3
2.5
3.2
2.7
4.1

3.8
3.7
3.1
3.8
2.5
5.6

2.6
2.1
1.4
2.9
3.8
5.1

–1.8
–3.3
–0.7
–3.0
–3.2
–4.3

7.2
9.0
2.3
7.4
7.8
7.2

0.5
4.8
–4.5
4.2
4.0
4.3

3.6
4.0
4.1
2.0
1.9
–0.8

3.5
4.0
4.0
3.0
2.8
0.5

1.8
3.4
2.1
2.4
3.0
0.6

2.2
3.6
1.4
2.7
3.1
2.1

2.4
3.5
0.8
3.0
2.6
2.5

Kosovo
Moldova
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Poland

4.8
3.4
2.3
3.0
3.6

4.8
4.2
3.2
1.1
5.2

3.4
4.1
4.7
2.9
6.2

4.8
3.6
4.4
3.9
4.6

–5.3
–8.3
–15.0
–4.7
–2.0

10.7
13.9
13.0
4.5
6.9

4.3
–4.6
7.7
2.8
5.3

4.1
1.2
6.5
2.1
0.2

4.6
0.1
3.2
2.8
2.9

3.9
1.7
3.2
3.4
3.2

4.0
2.2
3.2
3.2
3.1

3.9
3.5
3.0
3.0
2.6

Romania
Russia
Serbia
Türkiye
Ukraine1

2.3
1.8
1.4
4.7
–1.1

8.2
1.8
2.4
7.8
2.4

6.1
2.8
4.6
3.5
3.5

3.9
2.2
4.8
1.3
3.2

–3.7
–2.7
–1.0
1.8
–3.8

5.5
5.9
7.9
11.8
3.4

4.0
–1.4
2.6
5.4
–28.8

2.4
4.1
3.8
5.0
5.5

0.8
4.3
3.9
3.3
2.9

1.0
0.6
2.4
3.5
2.0

1.4
1.0
3.6
3.7
4.5

3.3
1.1
4.0
3.8
4.1

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados

2.4
–0.4
2.2
0.4
0.0
–0.5

1.4
2.7
2.8
3.5
3.4
0.1

1.1
6.7
–2.6
3.2
2.4
–1.2

0.2
3.2
–2.0
1.2
–0.8
0.7

–6.9
–18.9
–9.9
–24.0
–20.1
–15.1

7.4
8.2
10.4
14.7
17.6
–0.3

4.3
9.1
6.0
5.1
10.9
17.8

2.4
2.4
–1.9
7.7
3.0
4.1

2.4
3.7
–1.3
6.8
3.4
4.0

2.4
2.5
4.5
2.0
2.2
2.7

2.3
2.5
4.0
2.2
2.1
2.1

2.6
2.5
3.2
1.3
1.5
2.0

Belize
Bolivia1
Brazil
Chile
Colombia

1.7
5.0
2.1
3.5
4.1

–1.8
4.2
1.3
1.4
1.4

0.8
4.2
1.8
4.0
2.6

4.3
2.2
1.2
0.6
3.2

–13.5
–8.7
–3.3
–6.1
–7.2

18.0
6.1
4.8
11.3
10.8

9.3
3.6
3.0
2.2
7.3

0.5
3.1
3.2
0.5
0.7

3.5
0.7
3.4
2.6
1.6

1.5
0.6
2.4
2.5
2.5

2.4
...
1.9
2.0
2.3

2.0
...
2.5
2.2
2.8

128

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Average

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Latin America and the
Caribbean (continued)
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador

2.4
4.0
1.5
5.2
3.8
1.9

1.4
4.2
–6.6
3.9
6.0
2.2

1.1
2.6
3.5
7.1
1.0
2.4

0.2
2.4
5.5
4.9
0.2
2.4

–6.9
–4.3
–16.6
–7.9
–9.2
–7.9

7.4
7.9
6.9
14.0
9.4
11.9

4.3
4.6
5.6
5.2
5.9
2.9

2.4
5.1
4.7
2.2
2.0
3.5

2.4
4.3
3.5
5.0
–2.0
2.6

2.4
3.6
4.2
3.0
3.2
2.5

2.3
3.3
3.3
4.5
2.0
2.5

2.6
3.5
2.5
5.0
3.0
2.8

Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras

1.9
3.5
3.7
2.3
3.3

4.4
3.1
3.7
2.5
4.8

4.4
3.4
4.4
1.7
3.8

0.7
4.0
5.4
–1.7
2.6

–13.8
–1.8
43.5
–3.3
–9.0

4.7
8.0
20.1
–1.8
12.6

7.3
4.2
63.3
–1.7
4.1

4.5
3.5
33.8
–1.9
3.6

3.3
3.7
43.6
–4.2
3.6

3.3
3.8
10.3
–3.1
3.8

3.4
3.6
23.0
–1.2
3.5

2.7
3.9
1.1
1.5
3.8

Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay

0.2
1.6
4.1
7.2
4.7

2.3
1.9
4.6
5.6
4.8

2.5
2.0
–3.4
3.7
3.2

1.8
–0.4
–2.9
3.1
–0.4

–8.3
–8.4
–2.2
–17.8
–0.8

5.7
6.0
10.5
16.5
4.0

6.4
3.7
3.6
11.0
0.2

2.7
3.4
4.4
7.2
5.0

–0.5
1.4
3.6
2.7
4.2

2.1
1.0
3.0
4.0
4.4

1.5
1.5
2.9
4.0
3.7

1.5
2.1
3.4
4.0
3.5

Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname

5.5
2.6
1.2
0.9
2.0

2.5
0.2
3.4
1.5
1.6

4.0
2.0
2.9
3.2
4.9

2.2
2.9
–0.7
0.7
1.2

–10.9
–15.3
–23.8
–4.7
–16.0

13.4
0.4
11.3
2.2
–2.4

2.8
10.3
20.6
5.0
2.4

–0.4
4.7
3.3
5.5
2.5

3.3
2.0
4.7
5.2
3.0

2.9
1.7
2.4
4.4
2.7

2.7
2.2
2.1
2.7
3.7

2.5
2.6
1.5
2.7
3.0

Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay1
Venezuela1

0.9
4.4
–0.9

–4.9
1.7
–15.7

–0.9
0.2
–19.7

0.5
0.9
–27.7

–8.8
–7.4
–30.0

–0.7
5.8
1.0

0.9
4.5
8.0

1.5
0.7
4.0

2.5
3.1
5.3

1.0
2.5
0.5

1.2
2.4
–3.0

1.8
2.2
...

Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan1
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain

4.1
7.7
3.1
2.9
5.6
4.3

2.6
2.6
1.5
7.5
0.2
5.0

2.5
1.2
1.4
5.2
1.5
2.1

2.1
3.9
0.9
7.6
2.5
2.1

–2.3
–2.4
–5.0
–7.1
–4.2
–5.9

4.7
–14.5
3.8
5.8
5.6
4.4

6.4
–6.2
3.6
12.6
4.7
6.2

2.6
2.3
4.1
8.3
1.4
3.9

2.6
1.7
3.7
5.9
4.1
2.6

3.5
...
3.4
4.8
3.0
2.9

3.8
...
2.9
4.9
2.5
3.3

3.7
...
2.5
4.5
2.5
3.2

Djibouti
Egypt
Georgia
Iran
Iraq

5.5
4.3
4.8
2.5
6.7

5.5
4.2
5.2
3.0
–1.5

4.8
5.3
6.1
–3.7
2.6

5.5
5.5
5.4
–2.4
5.6

1.2
3.6
–6.3
4.4
–12.4

4.4
3.3
10.6
4.1
1.4

5.2
6.7
11.0
4.4
7.7

7.4
3.8
7.8
5.3
0.9

6.5
2.4
9.4
3.7
–0.2

6.0
4.3
7.2
0.6
0.5

6.0
4.5
5.3
1.1
3.6

5.5
5.3
5.0
2.0
4.1

Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon1

3.9
4.5
1.9
4.7
4.8

2.5
3.9
–4.7
4.7
0.9

1.9
4.1
2.7
3.5
–1.9

1.8
4.5
2.3
4.6
–6.8

–1.1
–2.6
–4.8
–7.1
–24.6

3.7
4.1
1.7
5.5
2.0

2.6
3.2
6.8
9.0
1.0

2.9
5.1
–1.7
9.0
–0.7

2.5
4.8
–2.6
9.0
–7.5

2.7
5.9
2.6
8.0
...

2.9
4.8
3.9
5.3
...

3.0
3.4
2.3
5.3
...

Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan1

–4.8
2.4
3.7
5.0
3.5

32.5
6.3
5.1
0.3
4.6

7.9
4.8
3.1
1.3
6.1

–11.2
3.1
2.9
–1.1
3.1

–29.5
–0.4
–7.2
–3.4
–0.9

28.3
0.7
8.2
2.6
5.8

–8.3
6.8
1.8
8.0
6.2

10.2
6.8
3.7
1.2
–0.2

1.9
6.3
3.8
1.7
2.5

15.6
4.0
4.4
2.9
2.7

4.2
4.3
4.2
4.0
3.6

2.2
3.0
3.8
3.6
4.5

Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan1
Syria1

10.0
4.3
...
0.4
...

–1.5
1.2
9.5
0.8
...

1.2
3.2
1.4
–2.3
...

0.7
1.7
2.8
–2.5
...

–3.6
–3.8
–2.8
–3.6
...

1.6
6.5
3.5
0.5
...

4.2
12.0
2.7
–2.5
...

1.5
0.5
4.2
–20.8
...

2.4
2.0
4.1
–23.4
...

2.9
4.0
3.0
3.2
...

6.1
4.0
3.3
9.5
...

3.4
3.3
4.1
5.5
...

Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkmenistan1
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan

6.8
2.7
10.6
4.2
7.6

7.1
2.3
4.4
–1.1
4.4

7.6
2.6
4.8
1.5
5.6

7.4
1.6
5.1
1.3
6.8

4.4
–9.0
–1.6
–8.7
1.6

9.4
4.7
9.8
4.6
8.0

8.0
2.7
3.3
7.5
6.0

8.3
0.2
4.2
4.3
6.3

8.4
1.6
3.0
4.0
6.5

7.5
2.5
2.3
4.8
6.8

5.5
2.1
2.3
5.0
6.0

4.5
1.4
2.3
3.9
5.7

West Bank and Gaza1
Yemen

5.8
–3.1

1.4
–5.1

1.2
0.8

1.4
2.1

–11.3
–8.5

7.0
–1.0

4.1
1.5

–4.6
–2.0

–26.6
–1.5

...
–1.5

...
0.0

...
5.0

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

129

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A4. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Real GDP (continued)
(Annual percent change)

Average

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi

4.8
5.1
4.2
2.8
5.4
3.0

2.8
–0.1
5.6
4.1
6.2
0.5

3.2
–0.6
6.6
4.2
6.6
1.6

3.1
–0.2
7.1
3.0
5.9
1.8

–3.1
–4.0
3.8
–8.7
2.0
0.3

3.8
2.1
7.2
11.9
6.9
3.1

4.4
4.2
6.3
5.5
1.6
1.8

3.7
1.3
6.4
3.2
3.0
2.7

4.1
4.4
7.5
–3.0
4.8
3.5

4.1
2.1
7.0
–0.9
4.0
4.4

4.4
2.1
6.7
2.3
4.8
4.1

4.6
3.1
6.0
4.9
4.7
4.5

Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros

3.3
4.1
–1.3
3.7
3.0

4.6
3.5
4.5
–2.1
3.8

3.7
4.0
3.2
5.2
3.6

6.9
3.4
4.1
5.9
1.8

–20.8
0.5
1.0
0.0
–0.2

7.0
3.0
–0.3
2.0
2.0

15.8
3.7
0.8
4.7
2.6

4.8
3.2
–0.1
5.0
3.0

7.2
3.5
1.9
3.5
3.3

5.2
3.8
3.0
3.3
3.8

4.8
4.1
3.3
3.6
4.0

4.5
4.6
3.9
4.1
3.8

Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea1

6.4
2.9
4.9
1.4
2.7

3.7
–5.6
7.4
–5.7
–10.0

4.8
–2.3
4.8
–6.2
13.0

4.5
1.1
6.7
–5.5
3.8

1.7
–6.3
0.7
–4.8
...

1.7
1.1
7.1
0.9
...

9.2
1.8
6.4
3.2
...

8.5
2.0
6.5
–5.1
...

6.5
2.1
6.0
0.9
...

5.3
2.7
6.4
–1.6
...

5.3
2.8
6.4
0.5
...

5.4
3.6
6.8
2.1
...

Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana

3.0
10.2
3.7
2.6
6.4

1.5
10.2
0.5
4.8
8.1

0.3
7.7
0.9
7.2
6.2

6.1
9.0
3.8
6.2
6.5

–2.9
6.1
–1.8
0.6
0.5

3.4
6.3
1.5
5.3
5.1

1.1
6.4
3.0
5.5
3.8

3.4
7.2
2.4
5.0
3.1

2.8
8.1
3.4
5.3
5.7

4.3
7.2
1.9
6.0
4.0

4.6
7.1
2.6
5.1
4.8

2.8
7.5
2.8
5.0
5.0

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia

4.7
3.7
4.6
3.2
5.4

10.3
4.8
3.8
–2.7
2.5

6.4
3.8
5.7
–1.5
1.2

5.6
4.5
5.1
–2.9
–2.5

4.7
1.5
–0.3
–5.3
–3.0

5.6
6.2
7.6
1.9
5.0

4.0
4.6
4.9
2.0
4.8

6.2
5.2
5.7
2.1
4.6

6.1
4.8
4.7
2.2
4.0

7.2
5.1
4.8
1.4
4.6

10.5
5.0
4.9
1.1
5.4

7.8
4.2
5.0
1.5
5.5

Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique

2.6
5.5
4.2
4.1
6.9

3.9
4.0
5.3
3.9
2.6

3.2
4.4
4.7
4.0
3.5

4.4
5.4
4.8
2.9
2.3

–7.1
1.0
–1.2
–14.5
–1.2

4.7
4.6
3.1
3.4
2.4

4.2
0.9
3.5
8.7
4.4

4.2
1.9
4.7
5.0
5.5

4.2
1.8
4.7
4.9
2.1

3.8
2.4
5.0
3.2
2.5

4.3
2.7
5.4
3.4
3.5

5.0
3.4
5.1
3.4
11.3

Namibia
Niger
Nigeria1
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe

3.9
5.6
5.6
7.5
3.8

–1.0
5.0
0.8
3.9
4.1

1.1
7.0
1.9
8.5
4.4

–0.8
6.1
2.2
9.4
2.0

–8.1
3.5
–6.4
–3.4
2.6

3.6
1.4
1.1
10.9
1.9

5.4
11.9
4.3
8.2
0.2

4.4
2.4
3.3
8.3
0.4

3.7
10.3
4.1
8.9
1.1

3.6
6.6
3.9
7.1
2.9

3.8
6.7
4.2
7.5
4.7

3.0
6.0
4.0
7.0
3.5

Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan

3.9
5.4
4.2
2.1
...

7.4
7.0
3.9
1.2
–5.8

6.2
4.9
3.4
1.6
–2.1

4.6
5.5
5.5
0.3
0.9

1.3
–11.7
–1.3
–6.2
–6.5

6.5
0.6
5.9
4.9
5.3

4.0
12.7
5.3
2.1
–5.2

4.3
2.3
5.7
0.8
3.0

6.4
2.9
4.4
0.5
–26.1

6.0
3.9
4.4
1.1
24.3

3.0
3.2
4.9
1.2
22.4

4.6
3.5
4.6
1.8
3.8

Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe1

6.5
5.1
6.1
6.5
4.1

6.7
4.0
6.8
3.5
5.2

7.0
4.8
5.6
4.1
5.0

6.9
4.9
7.6
1.4
–6.3

4.5
2.0
–1.1
–2.8
–7.8

4.8
6.0
5.5
6.2
8.5

4.7
5.8
6.2
5.2
6.1

5.1
5.6
4.9
5.4
5.3

5.5
5.3
6.3
4.0
1.7

6.0
5.2
6.4
5.8
6.0

6.3
5.5
7.6
6.4
4.6

6.2
5.5
6.1
4.8
3.5

1 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Bolivia, Eritrea, India, Lebanon, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Timor-Leste, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uruguay, Venezuela, West Bank

and Gaza, and Zimbabwe in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

130

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A5. Summary of Inflation
(Percent)

Average

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

1.3
1.6
1.3
–0.3
1.7

1.4
1.8
1.1
–0.1
1.9

1.7
2.3
1.5
0.0
1.7

1.5
1.7
1.7
0.6
1.3

1.6
1.3
1.8
0.9
2.0

3.3
4.6
2.1
–0.2
3.9

5.8
7.1
5.2
0.4
6.2

4.2
3.7
6.0
4.1
2.8

2.9
2.5
3.0
2.9
3.4

2.3
2.4
2.2
2.8
2.2

1.9
1.8
2.0
2.0
1.9

2.0
1.9
2.1
2.0
2.1

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area2
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1

1.6
1.8
1.5
0.3
2.0

1.7
2.1
1.5
0.5
1.8

2.0
2.4
1.8
1.0
1.9

1.4
1.8
1.2
0.5
1.4

0.7
1.3
0.3
0.0
0.6

3.1
4.7
2.6
–0.2
2.6

7.3
8.0
8.4
2.5
6.6

4.6
4.1
5.4
3.3
4.9

2.6
3.0
2.4
2.7
2.4

2.5
2.7
2.1
3.3
2.3

2.2
2.4
1.9
2.1
2.1

2.1
2.2
2.0
2.0
2.0

Emerging Market and Developing
Economies3

5.9

4.5

4.9

5.2

5.3

5.9

9.7

8.2

7.9

5.3

4.7

3.9

4.5
7.8
4.9
8.2
8.5

2.4
5.6
6.3
6.9
11.0

2.7
6.3
6.7
9.6
8.7

3.3
6.5
7.6
7.4
9.6

3.2
5.2
6.5
10.5
12.4

2.3
9.1
9.9
11.9
12.4

3.9
25.4
14.2
13.3
16.1

2.4
17.3
14.8
15.4
19.4

1.9
16.9
16.6
14.0
20.3

1.3
13.5
7.6
10.9
13.1

2.1
9.3
5.0
9.5
10.9

2.7
6.3
3.6
6.2
6.6

By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products4

8.2
5.5
6.7

6.7
4.2
7.0

8.5
4.5
7.8

6.8
5.0
9.1

9.8
4.8
15.9

11.9
5.2
15.6

13.6
9.2
17.6

12.9
7.7
17.4

12.5
7.4
15.9

12.2
4.6
9.4

11.8
3.9
6.7

7.2
3.5
4.9

By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies

6.8

6.0

6.0

5.9

6.5

7.8

13.2

12.1

10.9

7.5

6.6

4.8

Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2020–24

10.7

15.1

14.3

12.5

15.1

16.1

21.4

24.8

25.6

15.8

10.1

6.0

1.6
8.0
5.6
9.1

1.6
6.9
4.0
10.4

1.9
10.6
4.5
10.0

1.4
7.7
4.8
10.2

0.7
11.0
4.6
14.0

2.9
12.8
5.2
15.0

9.3
13.5
9.1
17.0

6.3
14.7
7.4
18.8

2.6
14.2
7.0
19.6

2.4
12.2
4.7
13.8

2.2
10.3
4.2
11.5

2.1
6.4
3.7
6.6

1.7
4.6

1.5
3.3

1.7
3.1

1.3
2.6

0.3
2.6

2.5
4.0

8.1
7.9

5.2
5.9

2.4
3.7

2.3
3.7

2.1
3.5

2.0
3.0

GDP Deflators
Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Japan
Other Advanced Economies1
Consumer Prices

Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups

Other Groups
European Union
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries
Memorandum
Median Inflation Rate
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies3
1 Excludes the United States, euro area countries, and Japan.
2 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.

3 Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.
4 Includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific note for Argentina in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

131

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A6. Advanced Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

End of Period2
Average

Projections

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

2024

2025

2026

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area3

1.6
1.8
1.5

1.7
2.1
1.5

2.0
2.4
1.8

1.4
1.8
1.2

0.7
1.3
0.3

3.1
4.7
2.6

7.3
8.0
8.4

4.6
4.1
5.4

2.6
3.0
2.4

2.5
2.7
2.1

2.2
2.4
1.9

2.1
2.2
2.0

2.5
2.7
2.4

2.4
2.6
1.8

2.1
2.2
1.9

Germany
France
Italy
Spain
The Netherlands

1.4
1.3
1.6
1.5
1.4

1.7
1.2
1.3
2.0
1.3

1.9
2.1
1.2
1.7
1.6

1.4
1.3
0.6
0.8
2.7

0.4
0.5
–0.1
–0.3
1.1

3.2
2.1
1.9
3.0
2.8

8.7
5.9
8.7
8.3
11.6

6.0
5.7
5.9
3.4
4.1

2.5
2.3
1.1
2.9
3.2

2.1
1.1
1.7
2.4
2.9

1.8
1.5
2.0
2.0
2.4

2.2
1.9
2.0
2.0
2.0

2.5
1.7
1.4
2.8
4.0

1.7
1.5
1.5
2.1
2.5

1.9
1.1
2.7
1.9
2.1

Belgium
Ireland
Austria
Portugal
Greece

1.9
0.6
1.9
1.3
1.4

2.2
0.3
2.2
1.6
1.1

2.3
0.7
2.1
1.2
0.8

1.3
0.9
1.5
0.3
0.5

0.4
–0.5
1.4
–0.1
–1.3

3.2
2.4
2.8
0.9
0.6

10.3
8.1
8.6
8.1
9.3

2.3
5.2
7.7
5.3
4.2

4.3
1.3
2.9
2.7
3.0

2.6
1.7
3.6
2.2
3.1

1.3
1.7
2.3
2.1
2.5

1.9
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.0

4.4
1.0
2.1
3.1
2.9

0.3
1.6
3.6
2.1
2.8

2.1
1.7
2.1
2.2
2.3

Finland
Slovak Republic
Croatia
Lithuania
Slovenia

1.9
1.6
1.9
3.0
1.8

0.8
1.4
1.3
3.7
1.4

1.2
2.5
1.6
2.5
1.7

1.1
2.8
0.8
2.2
1.6

0.4
2.0
0.0
1.1
–0.1

2.1
2.8
2.7
4.6
1.9

7.2
12.1
10.7
18.9
8.8

4.3
11.0
8.4
8.7
7.4

1.0
3.2
4.0
0.9
2.0

1.8
4.2
4.4
3.6
2.5

1.9
3.3
2.8
3.1
2.4

2.0
2.0
2.4
2.5
2.1

1.6
3.2
4.5
1.9
1.9

2.0
3.9
3.8
3.7
2.8

2.0
2.7
2.4
2.8
2.2

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta

1.9
3.4
3.4
1.3
1.9

2.1
2.9
3.7
0.7
1.3

2.0
2.6
3.4
0.8
1.7

1.7
2.7
2.3
0.5
1.5

0.0
0.1
–0.6
–1.1
0.8

3.5
3.2
4.5
2.3
0.7

8.1
17.2
19.4
8.1
6.1

2.9
9.1
9.1
3.9
5.6

2.3
1.3
3.7
2.3
2.4

2.3
3.8
5.1
0.7
2.4

2.2
2.6
4.3
1.3
2.0

2.0
2.2
2.3
2.0
2.0

1.6
3.4
3.9
3.1
1.8

1.2
3.4
5.3
–0.4
2.2

4.2
2.5
3.7
2.0
2.1

Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia

0.3
2.3
2.3
1.6
2.4

0.5
2.7
1.9
1.6
2.0

1.0
2.5
1.5
2.3
1.9

0.5
1.8
0.4
1.9
1.6

0.0
0.9
0.5
0.7
0.9

–0.2
2.6
2.5
3.4
2.8

2.5
9.1
5.1
6.8
6.7

3.3
7.3
3.6
3.9
5.6

2.7
2.5
2.3
2.4
3.2

3.3
3.4
2.0
2.0
2.6

2.1
2.5
1.8
2.0
3.0

2.0
2.0
2.0
1.9
2.5

2.9
2.5
1.9
1.9
2.4

2.8
3.4
1.9
2.0
3.2

2.0
2.0
1.9
2.1
2.8

Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Switzerland
Sweden
Czech Republic

1.2
2.4
0.1
1.4
2.0

0.6
0.6
0.5
1.9
2.5

1.4
0.4
0.9
2.0
2.1

0.6
0.6
0.4
1.7
2.8

–0.2
–0.2
–0.7
0.7
3.2

2.0
2.3
0.6
2.7
3.8

2.9
6.1
2.8
8.1
15.1

2.5
4.8
2.1
5.9
10.7

2.2
2.4
1.1
2.0
2.4

1.7
0.9
0.1
2.3
2.5

1.6
1.3
0.6
1.6
2.3

1.5
2.0
0.7
2.0
2.0

2.1
1.5
0.6
1.8
3.0

2.0
1.1
0.1
1.6
2.4

1.6
1.3
0.6
1.8
2.0

Norway
Hong Kong SAR
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand

2.1
3.3
1.7
1.5
1.9

1.9
1.5
0.2
1.1
1.9

2.8
2.4
0.8
0.7
1.6

2.2
2.9
0.8
0.7
1.6

1.3
0.3
–0.6
0.3
1.7

3.5
1.6
1.5
1.9
3.9

5.8
1.9
4.4
8.5
7.2

5.5
2.1
4.2
3.4
5.7

3.1
1.7
3.1
1.3
2.9

2.4
1.7
3.2
1.9
2.7

2.4
2.1
2.2
2.1
2.1

2.0
2.5
2.1
2.0
2.0

2.2
0.0
3.2
1.9
2.2

2.2
3.8
2.8
1.8
2.8

2.0
2.4
2.4
1.9
1.9

Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
Liechtenstein
Andorra
San Marino

1.7
4.8
5.3
0.1
1.0
2.0

1.8
1.2
1.8
0.5
2.6
1.0

1.3
3.0
2.7
0.9
1.0
1.2

0.1
2.8
3.0
0.4
0.5
0.5

–0.5
0.8
2.8
–0.7
0.1
–0.1

2.4
0.0
4.5
0.6
1.7
1.6

6.0
1.0
8.3
2.8
6.2
5.3

3.5
0.9
8.7
2.1
5.6
5.9

2.0
0.7
5.9
1.1
3.1
1.2

1.4
0.5
4.2
0.1
2.2
2.0

2.2
1.2
3.1
0.6
1.8
2.0

2.1
2.2
2.5
0.7
1.7
2.0

1.9
0.2
4.7
1.0
2.6
1.6

1.9
0.5
4.3
0.1
2.0
2.0

2.5
1.2
2.5
0.6
1.7
2.0

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies

1.5

1.8

2.1

1.5

0.8

3.3

7.3

4.7

2.7

2.5

2.2

2.1

2.5

2.4

2.1

Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.

1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.

2 Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.
3 Based on Eurostat’s harmonized index of consumer prices.

132

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1
(Annual percent change)

End of Period2
Average

Projections

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

2024

2025

2026

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China

4.5
7.5
7.0
0.4
5.3
2.9

2.4
5.4
4.3
–1.3
2.9
1.6

2.7
5.8
3.6
1.0
2.4
2.1

3.3
5.5
2.8
–0.4
2.0
2.9

3.2
5.6
3.0
1.9
2.9
2.5

2.3
5.6
8.2
1.7
2.9
0.9

3.9
6.1
5.9
3.7
5.3
2.0

2.4
9.0
4.5
0.4
2.1
0.2

1.9
9.7
4.3
–0.4
0.9
0.2

1.3
10.0
2.4
0.4
1.6
0.0

2.1
8.7
3.4
0.6
1.8
0.7

2.7
5.5
4.0
1.0
3.0
2.0

1.6
9.7
1.7
–0.5
3.0
0.0

1.8
8.5
3.1
0.6
1.6
0.5

2.2
8.4
3.7
0.6
1.8
0.8

Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.

3.9
7.8
5.8
2.3
4.3

3.3
3.6
3.8
0.4
0.8

4.1
3.4
3.3
0.6
2.0

1.8
4.8
2.8
–1.8
3.3

–2.6
6.2
2.0
2.6
5.1

0.2
5.5
1.6
2.1
3.8

4.3
6.7
4.1
5.3
23.0

2.3
5.4
3.7
9.3
31.2

4.5
4.6
2.3
2.5
23.1

0.1
2.8
1.8
7.8
7.8

1.1
4.0
2.9
3.5
5.5

3.5
4.0
2.5
2.0
9.9

1.3
3.7
1.6
2.9
16.9

0.5
3.3
2.6
6.5
5.0

2.1
4.4
2.6
3.0
6.2

Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia

2.4
6.0
2.7
3.4
10.5

3.8
2.3
0.1
0.1
4.3

1.0
1.4
0.8
1.0
6.8

0.7
1.3
–0.1
2.2
7.3

–1.1
–1.6
–0.7
1.0
3.7

2.5
0.2
2.2
1.8
7.4

3.4
2.6
2.8
5.0
15.1

2.5
2.6
7.4
6.2
10.4

1.8
1.4
5.2
5.4
6.2

1.6
3.9
5.2
4.1
8.3

2.2
2.5
5.9
3.4
8.1

2.0
2.0
2.4
2.2
6.6

1.7
4.3
5.7
3.0
8.3

2.4
3.0
4.7
4.1
8.2

2.0
2.0
7.0
3.4
8.0

Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea

9.7
3.9
8.9
3.4
5.5

4.0
4.5
4.5
1.1
5.4

7.3
1.1
4.1
2.4
4.4

9.1
4.1
4.6
0.4
3.9

2.2
0.9
6.1
0.7
4.9

9.6
2.0
3.6
–0.5
4.5

28.0
1.1
6.4
13.2
5.3

25.5
4.8
7.7
12.4
2.3

26.5
9.3
5.4
3.6
0.6

31.0
6.1
4.1
1.8
4.8

28.0
4.5
4.2
2.9
4.6

7.8
2.5
5.0
2.2
4.5

28.0
12.3
3.6
2.3
0.7

30.0
4.1
2.6
1.7
4.5

28.0
3.6
5.1
4.1
4.3

Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka3
Thailand

3.5
3.4
5.6
7.6
2.0

2.9
1.3
0.5
6.6
0.7

5.3
3.7
3.6
4.3
1.1

2.4
2.2
2.2
4.3
0.7

2.4
1.5
2.9
4.6
–0.8

3.9
–3.0
0.2
6.0
1.2

5.8
8.7
5.4
45.2
6.1

6.0
12.0
5.1
17.4
1.2

3.2
3.6
4.2
1.2
0.4

1.6
1.8
3.4
...
0.2

2.6
3.2
3.7
...
0.7

3.2
3.0
3.3
...
1.8

2.9
0.8
5.6
–1.5
1.2

1.5
1.4
4.0
...
0.6

2.8
3.1
3.4
...
0.8

Timor-Leste
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam

5.3
3.3
2.2
2.4
8.7

0.5
7.2
4.1
3.1
3.5

2.3
6.1
2.2
2.4
3.5

0.9
4.1
3.5
2.7
2.8

0.5
0.2
1.6
5.3
3.2

3.8
0.6
6.7
2.3
1.8

7.0
6.5
12.2
6.7
3.2

8.4
12.6
7.2
11.2
3.3

2.1
8.0
1.2
1.2
3.6

0.9
2.9
2.0
1.7
3.4

1.8
2.2
2.3
2.2
3.2

2.0
3.2
2.5
2.2
3.3

–0.4
6.4
4.5
–0.7
2.9

1.9
1.4
2.0
2.2
3.4

1.7
3.1
2.3
2.3
3.2

Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Hungary

7.8
2.4
20.7
1.3
2.6
3.4

5.6
2.0
6.0
0.8
1.2
2.4

6.3
2.0
4.9
1.4
2.6
2.8

6.5
1.4
5.6
0.6
2.5
3.4

5.2
1.6
5.5
–1.1
1.2
3.3

9.1
2.0
9.5
2.0
2.8
5.1

25.4
6.7
15.2
14.0
13.0
14.6

17.3
4.8
5.0
6.1
8.6
17.1

16.9
2.2
5.7
1.7
2.6
3.7

13.5
2.3
7.0
4.0
3.6
4.5

9.3
2.8
7.5
2.6
3.4
3.5

6.3
3.0
5.2
2.0
2.4
3.0

15.4
2.1
5.1
2.9
2.1
4.6

11.9
2.7
8.1
3.2
4.0
4.1

7.9
3.0
7.1
2.0
3.0
3.1

Kosovo
Moldova
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Poland

2.6
7.0
2.6
2.0
2.1

1.5
6.5
2.4
1.4
2.0

1.1
3.6
2.6
1.5
1.8

2.7
4.8
0.4
0.8
2.3

0.2
3.8
–0.3
1.2
3.4

3.3
5.1
2.4
3.2
5.1

11.6
28.7
13.0
14.2
14.2

4.9
13.4
8.6
9.4
11.5

1.6
4.7
3.3
3.5
3.7

3.5
7.7
4.1
3.9
3.8

2.7
5.5
2.3
3.0
2.8

2.0
5.0
2.0
2.0
2.5

1.1
7.0
2.1
4.3
4.7

4.1
6.2
5.0
3.5
2.8

2.4
5.0
2.0
2.4
2.7

Romania
Russia
Serbia
Türkiye
Ukraine

3.6
9.2
6.3
8.1
13.9

1.3
3.7
3.1
11.1
14.4

4.6
2.9
2.0
16.3
10.9

3.8
4.5
1.8
15.2
7.9

2.6
3.4
1.6
12.3
2.7

5.0
6.7
4.1
19.6
9.4

13.8
13.7
12.0
72.3
20.2

10.4
5.9
12.4
53.9
12.9

5.6
8.4
4.7
58.5
6.5

7.3
9.0
4.6
34.9
12.6

6.7
5.2
4.0
24.7
7.6

2.6
4.0
3.0
15.0
5.0

6.1
9.5
4.3
44.4
12.0

8.5
7.6
4.7
31.0
9.0

3.5
4.5
3.4
21.0
7.0

Latin America and the Caribbean4
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina3
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados

4.9
1.9
13.6
1.6
1.8
3.9

6.3
2.4
25.7
–1.0
1.5
4.4

6.7
1.2
34.3
3.6
2.3
3.0

7.6
1.4
53.5
3.9
2.5
1.7

6.5
1.1
42.0
–1.3
0.0
0.6

9.9
1.6
48.4
0.7
2.9
1.5

14.2
7.5
72.4
5.5
5.6
4.4

14.8
5.1
133.5
3.4
3.1
3.2

16.6
6.2
219.9
1.7
0.4
1.4

7.6
3.5
41.3
0.8
0.5
2.3

5.0
2.4
16.4
2.1
1.0
2.5

3.6
2.0
7.5
2.3
2.0
2.4

12.2
5.4
117.8
0.3
0.0
0.4

6.5
3.0
28.0
1.9
0.6
3.3

4.2
2.0
10.0
2.1
1.4
2.4

Belize
Bolivia3
Brazil
Chile
Colombia

1.3
6.2
6.1
3.7
4.3

1.1
2.8
3.4
2.2
4.3

0.3
2.3
3.7
2.3
3.2

0.2
1.8
3.7
2.3
3.5

0.1
0.9
3.2
3.0
2.5

3.2
0.7
8.3
4.5
3.5

6.3
1.7
9.3
11.6
10.2

4.4
2.6
4.6
7.6
11.7

3.3
5.1
4.4
3.9
6.6

1.4
20.8
5.2
4.3
4.9

1.9
...
4.0
3.1
3.5

1.3
...
2.9
3.0
3.0

2.6
10.0
4.8
4.5
5.2

1.5
26.2
4.9
3.7
4.4

1.3
...
3.7
3.0
3.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

133

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

End of Period2
Average

Projections

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

2024

2025

2026

Latin America and the
Caribbean (continued) 4
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador

4.9
5.6
1.5
4.7
4.1
2.2

6.3
1.6
0.3
3.3
0.4
1.0

6.7
2.2
1.0
3.6
–0.2
1.1

7.6
2.1
1.5
1.8
0.3
0.1

6.5
0.7
–0.7
3.8
–0.3
–0.4

9.9
1.7
1.6
8.2
0.1
3.5

14.2
8.3
7.7
8.8
3.5
7.2

14.8
0.5
4.2
4.8
2.2
4.0

16.6
–0.4
3.1
3.3
1.5
0.9

7.6
0.4
2.8
3.7
1.1
0.3

5.0
2.0
2.3
4.2
2.8
1.0

3.6
3.0
2.2
4.0
1.5
1.8

12.2
0.8
2.1
3.3
0.5
0.3

6.5
0.1
3.1
3.7
3.6
0.7

4.2
3.0
2.3
4.0
1.7
1.2

Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras

2.0
4.8
3.6
6.4
5.7

0.9
4.4
1.9
10.6
3.9

0.8
3.8
1.3
11.4
4.3

0.6
3.7
2.1
17.3
4.4

–0.7
3.2
1.2
22.9
3.5

1.2
4.3
3.3
15.9
4.5

2.6
6.9
6.5
27.6
9.1

2.7
6.2
4.5
44.1
6.7

1.1
2.9
2.5
25.8
4.6

1.2
1.7
3.6
27.8
4.6

1.1
3.3
4.4
26.2
4.2

2.0
4.0
5.5
8.0
4.0

0.8
1.7
2.9
27.9
3.9

1.0
2.2
4.3
29.4
4.9

1.6
4.0
4.5
24.1
4.0

Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay

9.0
3.9
7.5
3.8
5.2

4.4
6.0
3.9
0.9
3.6

3.7
4.9
4.9
0.8
4.0

3.9
3.6
5.4
–0.4
2.8

5.2
3.4
3.7
–1.6
1.8

5.9
5.7
4.9
1.6
4.8

10.3
7.9
10.5
2.9
9.8

6.5
5.5
8.4
1.5
4.6

5.5
4.7
4.6
0.8
3.8

4.2
3.9
2.0
–0.1
3.9

5.0
3.3
2.7
2.0
3.7

5.0
3.0
2.7
2.0
3.5

5.0
4.2
2.8
–0.2
3.8

4.5
3.7
2.0
0.7
4.0

5.0
3.0
2.7
2.0
3.5

Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Suriname

3.2
1.7
1.9

2.8
0.7
0.1

1.3
–1.0
2.6

2.1
–0.3
0.5

1.8
–1.2
–1.8

4.0
1.2
2.4

7.9
2.7
6.4

6.3
3.6
4.5

2.4
1.0
–0.5

1.7
1.7
0.4

1.9
2.1
1.5

2.0
2.0
2.0

2.0
1.9
1.6

2.0
1.7
1.3

2.0
2.1
–0.9

2.3
10.9

2.2
22.0

2.3
6.9

0.9
4.4

–0.6
34.9

1.6
59.1

5.7
52.4

4.6
51.6

3.6
16.2

2.1
9.0

2.1
9.6

2.0
5.0

2.1
10.1

2.2
10.6

2.0
8.2

Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela3

7.0
8.2
52.7

1.9
6.2
438.1

1.0
7.6
65,374.1

1.0
7.9
19,906.0

0.6
9.8
2,355.1

2.1
7.7
1,588.5

5.8
9.1
186.5

4.6
5.9
337.5

0.5
4.8
49.0

1.5
4.7
269.9

2.2
4.5
682.1

2.0
4.5
...

0.5
5.5
47.2

2.2
4.0
548.6

2.3
4.5
628.8

Middle East and
Central Asia
Afghanistan3
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain

8.2
6.1
4.9
4.6
7.2
2.4

6.9
5.0
5.6
0.9
12.9
1.4

9.6
0.6
4.3
2.5
2.3
2.1

7.4
2.3
2.0
1.5
2.6
1.0

10.5
5.6
2.4
1.5
2.8
–2.3

11.9
7.8
7.2
7.5
6.7
–0.6

13.3
10.6
9.3
8.8
13.9
3.6

15.4
–7.7
9.3
2.0
8.8
0.1

14.0
–4.3
4.0
0.4
2.2
0.9

10.9
...
3.5
3.3
5.7
0.3

9.5
...
3.9
2.8
4.5
0.8

6.2
...
3.3
3.0
4.0
2.0

12.0
0.3
3.0
1.7
4.9
0.5

10.1
...
4.6
3.2
5.2
0.5

8.9
...
3.9
3.0
4.0
0.8

Djibouti
Egypt
Georgia
Iran
Iraq

3.6
10.8
4.4
18.4
4.7

0.6
23.5
6.0
8.2
0.2

0.1
20.9
2.6
26.9
0.4

3.3
13.9
4.9
34.8
–0.2

1.8
5.7
5.2
36.5
0.6

1.2
4.5
9.6
40.2
6.0

5.2
8.5
11.9
45.8
5.0

1.4
24.4
2.5
40.7
4.4

2.1
33.3
1.1
32.5
2.6

1.5
20.4
3.9
42.4
1.5

1.4
11.8
3.4
41.6
2.5

1.3
5.3
3.0
25.0
3.6

–0.6
27.5
1.9
37.1
2.7

1.8
14.9
4.4
45.0
1.8

1.6
11.3
3.0
35.0
2.5

Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon3

3.7
8.9
...
8.8
3.3

3.3
7.5
1.6
3.2
4.5

4.5
6.0
0.6
1.5
6.1

0.8
5.3
1.1
1.1
2.9

0.3
6.8
2.1
6.3
84.9

1.3
8.0
3.4
11.9
154.8

4.2
15.0
4.0
13.9
171.2

2.1
14.5
3.6
10.8
221.3

1.6
8.7
2.9
5.0
45.2

2.2
11.4
2.2
8.0
...

2.6
11.2
2.2
6.9
...

2.3
5.9
1.7
5.0
...

1.8
8.6
2.6
6.3
18.1

2.2
12.7
2.2
8.0
...

2.6
11.4
2.2
6.0
...

Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan3

8.2
4.3
1.4
3.5
9.7

25.8
2.3
0.8
1.5
4.8

13.2
3.1
1.6
0.7
4.7

–2.2
2.3
0.2
0.5
6.8

1.4
2.4
0.7
–0.4
10.7

2.9
3.6
1.4
1.7
8.9

4.5
9.6
6.6
2.5
12.2

2.4
4.9
6.1
1.0
29.2

2.1
2.5
0.9
0.6
23.4

1.8
2.5
1.2
0.9
4.5

1.6
3.5
1.8
1.5
6.0

1.6
4.0
2.0
2.0
6.5

2.3
1.5
0.7
0.7
12.6

1.6
3.5
1.2
0.5
3.2

1.6
3.6
2.0
1.5
8.0

Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan3
Syria3

3.5
3.5
...
21.1
...

0.6
–0.8
4.0
32.4
...

0.1
2.5
4.3
63.3
...

–0.9
–2.1
4.7
51.0
...

–2.5
3.4
4.1
163.3
...

2.3
3.1
4.6
359.1
...

5.0
2.5
6.8
138.8
...

3.1
2.3
6.2
77.2
...

1.2
1.7
5.5
185.7
...

0.1
2.1
3.6
87.2
...

2.6
2.0
3.5
54.6
...

2.0
2.0
3.0
16.1
...

–1.6
0.3
5.6
151.1
...

0.1
2.1
3.7
49.0
...

2.6
2.0
3.5
41.6
...

Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan

8.7
4.2
5.6
2.9
11.1

7.3
5.3
8.0
2.0
13.9

3.8
7.3
13.3
3.1
17.5

7.8
6.7
5.1
–1.9
14.5

8.6
5.6
6.1
–2.1
12.9

9.0
5.7
19.5
–0.1
10.8

6.6
8.3
11.2
4.8
11.4

3.7
9.3
–1.6
1.6
10.0

3.5
7.0
4.6
1.7
9.6

3.8
5.9
3.9
1.6
9.1

4.5
6.1
5.0
2.0
7.3

5.0
8.8
8.0
2.0
5.0

3.7
6.2
3.8
1.7
9.8

4.0
5.4
4.0
1.6
8.5

5.0
6.5
6.0
2.0
6.5

West Bank and Gaza3
Yemen

2.8
13.2

0.2
30.4

–0.2
33.6

1.6
15.7

–0.7
21.7

1.2
31.5

3.7
29.5

5.9
0.9

53.7
33.9

...
20.4

...
18.5

...
10.0

88.0
8.9

...
31.0

...
9.0

134

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A7. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Consumer Prices1 (continued)
(Annual percent change)

End of Period2
Average

Projections

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

2024

2025

2026

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi

8.5
13.1
2.0
6.7
1.9
9.9

11.0
29.8
1.8
3.3
1.5
15.8

8.7
19.6
0.8
3.2
2.0
–2.8

9.6
17.1
–0.9
2.7
–3.2
–0.8

12.4
22.3
3.0
1.9
1.9
7.5

12.4
25.8
1.7
6.7
3.9
8.4

16.1
21.4
1.4
12.2
13.8
18.9

19.4
13.6
2.7
5.1
0.9
27.1

20.3
28.2
1.2
2.8
4.2
20.2

13.1
21.6
2.1
3.4
1.3
37.3

10.9
16.3
2.0
4.7
2.4
26.3

6.6
9.8
2.0
4.5
2.0
13.4

14.7
27.5
–0.4
1.7
4.9
36.4

11.2
20.0
2.1
5.0
1.3
29.2

9.3
13.4
2.0
4.5
2.5
25.9

Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros

2.1
2.4
4.9
1.5
2.8

0.8
0.6
4.2
–0.9
0.1

1.3
1.1
1.6
4.0
1.7

1.1
2.5
2.8
–1.0
3.7

0.6
2.5
0.9
4.5
0.8

1.9
2.3
4.3
–0.8
0.0

7.9
6.3
5.6
5.8
12.4

3.7
7.4
3.0
2.3
8.5

1.0
4.5
1.5
5.1
5.0

1.5
3.7
4.6
4.0
3.3

2.0
3.3
3.3
3.6
1.9

2.0
3.0
3.3
3.0
2.1

1.5
5.0
4.2
5.1
6.0

2.0
3.6
1.3
1.9
1.7

2.0
2.8
3.5
4.7
3.2

Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea3

11.8
3.2
1.7
3.7
12.0

35.7
0.4
0.7
0.7
–13.3

29.3
1.2
0.6
1.3
–14.4

4.7
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.3

11.4
1.4
2.3
4.8
...

9.0
2.0
4.2
–0.1
...

9.3
3.0
5.2
4.9
...

19.9
4.3
4.4
2.4
...

17.7
3.1
3.4
3.4
...

8.8
3.6
1.0
2.9
...

7.1
3.2
1.5
2.9
...

7.0
3.0
2.0
2.5
...

11.7
6.3
2.1
3.4
...

7.9
3.4
1.0
2.9
...

7.0
3.2
1.5
3.5
...

Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana

7.2
16.1
2.4
5.4
12.3

6.2
10.7
2.7
8.0
12.4

4.8
13.8
4.8
6.5
9.8

2.6
15.8
2.0
7.1
7.2

3.9
20.4
1.7
5.9
9.9

3.7
26.8
1.1
7.4
10.0

4.8
33.9
4.3
11.5
31.9

4.9
30.2
3.6
17.0
39.2

4.0
21.0
1.2
11.6
22.9

3.5
13.0
1.4
7.5
16.6

4.0
9.4
2.5
4.9
9.9

3.0
9.4
2.0
5.0
8.0

3.9
17.0
0.9
10.2
23.8

3.5
9.8
2.0
4.8
12.0

4.0
8.2
2.6
5.0
8.0

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia

13.4
2.5
8.2
6.0
9.3

8.9
–0.2
8.0
4.5
12.4

9.8
0.4
4.7
4.7
23.5

9.5
0.3
5.2
4.9
27.0

10.6
1.5
5.3
5.4
17.0

12.6
3.3
6.1
6.5
7.8

10.5
7.9
7.6
8.2
7.6

5.4
7.2
7.7
6.5
10.1

4.7
3.7
4.5
5.2
8.2

3.1
2.0
4.0
4.5
9.8

3.0
2.0
5.2
4.8
7.7

3.0
2.0
5.0
4.8
5.1

3.1
5.7
3.0
4.2
10.7

3.3
2.0
4.4
4.8
8.1

3.2
2.0
5.3
5.1
7.3

Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique

7.8
15.4
2.2
4.3
8.2

8.6
11.5
2.4
3.7
15.8

8.6
9.2
1.9
3.2
3.2

5.6
9.4
–3.0
0.5
5.7

4.2
8.6
0.5
2.5
0.9

5.8
9.3
3.8
4.0
6.6

8.2
20.8
9.7
10.8
10.4

9.9
28.8
2.1
7.0
7.0

7.6
32.2
3.2
3.6
3.2

8.4
28.2
3.5
3.9
4.9

7.2
24.1
2.0
3.6
5.4

6.0
14.6
2.0
3.5
5.5

8.6
28.1
4.9
2.9
4.1

8.3
27.7
3.2
4.0
5.0

7.3
23.3
2.0
3.5
5.5

Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe

6.3
1.8
10.7
6.3
13.0

6.1
0.2
16.5
4.8
5.7

4.3
2.8
12.1
1.4
7.9

3.7
–2.5
11.4
2.4
7.7

2.2
2.9
13.2
7.7
9.8

3.6
3.8
17.0
0.8
8.1

6.1
4.2
18.8
13.9
18.0

5.9
3.7
24.7
14.0
21.2

4.2
9.1
31.4
4.8
14.4

3.7
4.2
23.0
7.0
9.7

3.6
3.2
22.0
4.7
7.0

3.0
2.0
10.0
5.0
5.0

3.4
4.7
15.4
6.8
11.6

3.9
3.6
21.0
6.3
7.8

3.6
2.5
18.0
4.1
6.1

Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan

1.7
8.3
8.0
6.3
...

1.1
2.8
18.2
5.3
213.0

0.5
3.7
16.0
4.6
83.4

1.0
1.8
14.8
4.1
49.3

2.5
1.0
13.4
3.3
24.0

2.2
10.0
11.9
4.6
30.2

9.7
2.6
27.2
6.9
–3.2

5.9
–0.9
47.7
5.9
39.7

0.8
0.3
28.4
4.4
99.8

2.0
0.4
9.4
3.4
97.5

2.0
1.1
10.5
3.7
15.8

2.0
3.0
9.0
3.0
5.2

0.2
1.7
13.8
3.0
195.5

2.0
0.8
9.0
4.0
27.2

2.0
1.5
9.0
3.6
15.1

Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

9.0
2.5
8.5
10.3
–2.2

5.3
–0.2
5.6
6.6
0.9

3.5
0.9
2.5
7.5
10.6

3.4
0.7
2.1
9.2
255.3

3.3
1.8
2.8
15.7
557.2

3.7
4.5
2.2
22.0
98.5

4.4
7.6
7.2
11.0
193.4

3.8
5.3
5.4
10.9
667.4

3.1
2.9
3.3
15.0
736.1

3.3
2.4
3.8
14.2
89.0

3.5
4.5
4.3
9.2
18.2

4.0
2.2
5.0
7.0
8.0

3.1
1.2
3.3
16.7
686.8

3.2
5.6
3.8
11.1
30.7

4.1
3.9
4.8
7.9
12.7

1 Movements in consumer prices are shown as annual averages.

2 Monthly year-over-year changes and, for several countries, on a quarterly basis.

3 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia, Eritrea, Lebanon, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Venezuela, and West Bank and Gaza in the “Country Notes” section of the

Statistical Appendix.

4 Excludes Venezuela but includes Argentina from 2017 onward. See the country-specific notes for Argentina and Venezuela in the “Country Notes” section of the Statistical Appendix.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

135

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A8. Major Advanced Economies: General Government Fiscal Balances and Debt1
(Percent of GDP, unless noted otherwise)

Average

Projections

2007–16

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Major Advanced Economies
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2

–5.3
–1.2
–4.6

–3.4
–0.6
–3.1

–3.4
–0.1
–3.2

–3.8
0.1
–3.7

–11.7
–3.9
–8.7

–8.9
–0.6
–8.0

–3.7
0.2
–5.1

–6.1
0.1
–5.9

–6.2
0.0
–5.8

–5.6
–0.2
–5.7

–6.0
–0.2
–5.8

–5.9
0.0
–5.9

United States
Net Lending/Borrowing3
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

–6.8
–1.4
–5.8
69.6
94.8

–4.8
–1.3
–4.3
79.2
106.4

–5.3
–0.6
–4.9
80.0
107.6

–5.8
0.1
–5.7
81.7
108.8

–14.1
–3.4
–10.5
96.1
132.5

–11.4
0.1
–10.5
95.9
125.0

–3.7
0.1
–6.0
92.0
119.1

–7.8
0.3
–7.4
94.5
119.8

–8.0
0.4
–7.6
97.4
122.3

–7.4
0.1
–7.7
99.6
125.0

–7.9
0.0
–7.7
103.0
128.7

–7.6
0.0
–7.6
116.8
143.4

Euro Area
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

–3.3
–1.2
–2.4
68.4
84.6

–1.0
–0.4
–0.6
72.0
87.5

–0.5
0.1
–0.3
70.2
85.5

–0.5
0.4
–0.5
68.6
83.6

–7.0
–5.3
–3.5
78.5
96.5

–5.1
–1.6
–4.0
76.7
93.8

–3.4
0.8
–3.6
74.0
89.3

–3.5
0.2
–3.7
73.2
87.1

–3.1
–0.2
–3.1
73.9
87.2

–3.2
–0.3
–3.0
75.0
87.8

–3.4
–0.2
–3.4
76.4
88.9

–3.7
0.1
–3.8
81.0
92.2

Germany
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

–0.6
0.0
–0.3
55.7
73.2

1.3
1.0
1.1
44.7
64.0

1.9
0.9
1.5
42.1
60.8

1.3
0.4
1.1
39.8
58.7

–4.4
–3.1
–3.0
45.3
68.0

–3.2
–0.8
–2.8
46.2
68.0

–1.9
1.3
–1.9
45.9
64.4

–2.5
–0.2
–2.4
45.9
62.4

–2.7
–1.3
–2.0
47.4
63.5

–2.5
–1.4
–1.8
48.7
64.4

–3.4
–0.9
–2.9
50.7
66.0

–4.0
0.6
–4.4
60.2
73.6

France
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

–4.9
–1.3
–4.1
77.9
87.2

–3.4
–1.5
–2.3
89.5
98.7

–2.3
–0.8
–1.6
89.4
98.5

–2.4
0.0
–1.4
89.0
98.1

–8.9
–4.5
–5.9
101.6
114.9

–6.6
–2.1
–5.1
100.5
112.8

–4.7
–0.7
–4.2
101.1
111.4

–5.4
–0.4
–5.3
101.5
109.6

–5.8
–0.1
–5.8
104.9
113.1

–5.4
–0.3
–5.3
108.2
116.5

–5.8
–0.3
–5.7
111.3
119.6

–6.3
0.1
–6.4
121.1
129.4

Italy
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

–3.0
–3.4
–1.5
111.1
122.5

–2.5
–2.3
–1.3
120.9
133.7

–2.2
–1.8
–1.3
121.6
134.2

–1.5
–1.8
–0.5
121.5
133.9

–9.4
–11.1
–3.1
141.0
154.4

–8.9
–3.8
–7.8
133.7
145.8

–8.1
0.1
–8.7
127.2
138.3

–7.2
0.1
–7.7
124.2
134.6

–3.4
0.0
–3.5
125.1
135.3

–3.3
–0.2
–3.1
126.9
136.8

–2.8
–0.1
–2.7
128.6
138.3

–2.5
–0.2
–2.3
128.3
137.0

Japan
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt4

–6.3
–0.1
–6.2
131.5
212.7

–3.1
1.0
–3.7
148.1
231.3

–2.5
1.9
–3.0
151.1
232.4

–3.0
0.7
–3.3
151.6
236.4

–9.1
–3.0
–8.1
162.0
258.4

–6.1
–1.6
–5.4
156.0
253.7

–4.2
–0.9
–4.2
149.5
248.2

–2.3
0.2
–2.4
136.3
240.5

–1.5
0.2
–1.6
133.9
236.1

–1.3
0.3
–1.4
130.1
229.6

–2.0
0.2
–2.1
128.9
226.8

–4.4
0.0
–4.4
129.9
222.2

United Kingdom
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt
Gross Debt

–6.1
–1.9
–4.7
67.3
74.9

–2.5
–0.3
–2.1
77.2
86.7

–2.3
–0.3
–2.1
76.6
86.3

–2.5
0.0
–2.4
75.8
85.7

–13.2
–3.5
–11.1
93.1
105.8

–7.7
0.5
–7.2
91.6
105.1

–4.6
1.9
–5.6
89.8
99.6

–6.1
–0.1
–6.3
91.8
100.4

–5.7
–0.3
–5.5
93.7
101.2

–4.3
–0.4
–4.0
94.6
103.4

–3.6
–0.4
–3.3
95.9
104.8

–2.2
0.0
–2.2
96.4
105.4

Canada
Net Lending/Borrowing
Output Gap2
Structural Balance2
Net Debt5
Gross Debt

–1.4
–0.3
–1.3
24.2
83.2

–0.1
0.4
–0.3
12.7
90.9

0.4
0.6
0.0
11.7
90.8

0.0
0.4
–0.2
8.7
90.2

–10.9
–3.4
–8.2
16.3
118.1

–3.1
–1.4
–2.0
14.2
112.6

0.6
0.8
0.0
13.6
104.2

0.1
0.0
0.0
14.4
107.7

–2.0
–0.5
–0.8
12.5
111.3

–2.2
–1.0
–1.6
13.3
113.9

–2.4
–0.9
–1.9
14.1
113.0

–1.5
0.0
–1.4
15.9
107.9

Note: The methodology and specific assumptions for each country are discussed in Box A1. The country group composites for fiscal data are calculated as the sum of the US dollar values for the
relevant individual countries.
1 Debt data refer to the end of the year and are not always comparable across countries. Gross and net debt levels reported by national statistical agencies for countries that have adopted the
System of National Accounts 2008 (Australia, Canada, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, United States) are adjusted to exclude unfunded pension liabilities of government employees’
defined-benefit pension plans.
2 Percent of potential GDP.
3 Figures reported by the national statistical agency are adjusted to exclude items related to the accrual-basis accounting of government employees’ defined-benefit pension plans.
4 Nonconsolidated basis.
5 Includes equity shares.

136

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Averages

Projections

2007–16

2017–26

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

3.4

2.8

5.4

4.0

1.1

–8.3

10.8

5.8

1.0

3.5

3.6

2.3

0.1
0.7

2.5
2.6

4.6
4.8

5.5
3.3

–2.4
0.0

–1.6
–2.4

12.7
10.2

6.8
13.8

–2.6
–2.3

0.2
0.7

1.0
–0.7

1.3
–0.3

Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

3.0
4.1

2.2
3.8

4.8
6.2

3.4
4.1

1.4
0.7

–8.7
–6.6

9.7
12.7

6.0
4.6

0.9
1.4

1.8
6.5

2.1
5.9

1.7
3.3

Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

2.5
5.5

2.4
3.4

4.7
7.0

3.8
5.2

2.0
–0.5

–8.2
–9.5

10.2
12.1

7.4
4.0

–0.7
3.7

2.1
5.6

3.1
4.3

1.3
4.0

Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

0.2
0.1

0.1
0.0

–0.2
1.4

–0.4
1.3

0.1
–1.2

0.9
–1.0

1.1
1.2

–1.6
1.2

0.4
–0.9

0.9
0.0

0.4
–1.2

–0.5
–0.3

Trade in Goods and Services
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs

Trade in Goods
World Trade1
Volume
Price Deflator
In US Dollars
In SDRs

3.1

2.5

5.4

3.7

0.1

–5.5

11.0

3.3

–0.9

2.8

3.4

2.0

–0.1
0.4

2.5
2.6

5.1
5.3

5.9
3.8

–2.9
–0.5

–2.2
–3.0

14.6
12.0

8.6
15.7

–4.0
–3.8

–0.5
–0.1

0.6
–1.1

1.0
–0.6

World Trade Prices in US Dollars2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal

0.4
–3.9
1.4
2.0
3.8
0.2
–2.6

1.6
4.3
5.6
2.7
8.5
0.6
6.7

0.1
22.5
6.4
3.8
–3.8
5.4
22.2

2.0
29.4
1.3
–1.2
–9.2
2.0
6.6

0.4
–10.4
0.7
–3.1
–5.7
–5.4
3.9

–3.2
–32.0
6.6
1.7
2.4
–3.4
3.5

6.7
65.8
26.7
27.0
22.4
15.5
46.7

10.3
39.2
7.9
14.8
14.1
5.7
–5.6

–1.7
–16.4
–5.7
–6.8
4.0
–15.6
–2.8

1.3
–1.8
3.7
–3.1
64.4
4.3
–1.9

0.6
–12.9
7.4
–4.4
21.0
–1.2
0.3

–0.1
–4.5
4.1
2.3
–7.0
1.9
3.0

World Trade Prices in SDRs2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal

1.0
–3.4
2.0
2.5
4.3
0.8
–2.0

1.7
4.4
5.8
2.8
8.7
0.7
6.8

0.4
22.8
6.7
4.1
–3.5
5.7
22.5

–0.1
26.7
–0.8
–3.3
–11.1
–0.1
4.4

2.9
–8.2
3.2
–0.7
–3.4
–3.1
6.4

–3.9
–32.6
5.7
0.9
1.6
–4.2
2.6

4.3
62.1
23.9
24.1
19.7
12.9
43.4

17.5
48.2
14.9
22.3
21.6
12.6
0.6

–1.5
–16.2
–5.4
–6.5
4.2
–15.4
–2.5

1.7
–1.3
4.2
–2.7
65.2
4.8
–1.4

–1.2
–14.4
5.6
–6.1
18.9
–2.9
–1.4

–1.8
–6.0
2.4
0.6
–8.6
0.3
1.4

World Trade Prices in Euros2
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities
Food
Beverages
Agricultural Raw Materials
Metal

1.7
–2.7
2.7
3.2
5.1
1.5
–1.4

1.0
3.7
5.1
2.1
8.0
0.1
6.1

–1.9
20.0
4.3
1.7
–5.7
3.3
19.7

–2.5
23.6
–3.2
–5.6
–13.2
–2.5
1.9

5.9
–5.4
6.2
2.3
–0.5
–0.2
9.6

–5.0
–33.3
4.5
–0.2
0.5
–5.2
1.5

2.9
59.9
22.2
22.4
18.1
11.3
41.5

23.9
56.3
21.2
29.0
28.2
18.8
6.0

–4.2
–18.5
–8.1
–9.1
1.3
–17.7
–5.2

1.2
–1.8
3.7
–3.2
64.3
4.3
–2.0

–3.7
–16.6
2.9
–8.5
15.9
–5.4
–3.9

–3.3
–7.6
0.8
–1.0
–10.0
–1.4
–0.3

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

137

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A9. Summary of World Trade Volumes and Prices (continued)
(Annual percent change, unless noted otherwise)

Averages

Projections

2007–16

2017–26

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2.6
3.9
2.1
4.3

1.8
3.4
1.3
3.8

4.5
6.2
1.4
7.0

3.0
3.9
–0.5
4.7

0.4
–0.2
–3.7
0.5

–6.5
–3.6
–8.4
–2.8

9.9
12.0
2.3
13.3

3.7
1.7
6.1
1.0

–0.9
0.4
1.9
0.2

0.6
6.3
2.3
7.0

2.2
5.7
5.6
5.8

1.4
2.8
6.8
2.1

2.1
5.3
4.9
5.3

2.1
3.0
2.4
3.1

4.5
7.7
–0.6
9.0

3.9
4.3
–3.2
5.4

0.4
–0.6
2.8
–1.0

–6.0
–5.4
–12.1
–4.5

11.5
10.6
0.8
11.8

5.1
1.8
11.2
0.8

–3.2
1.5
10.7
0.5

1.3
4.2
6.8
3.9

3.4
2.8
5.1
2.5

0.7
4.0
5.1
3.8

Price Deflators in SDRs
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters

0.1
1.3
–1.1
1.7

2.4
2.7
4.6
2.4

4.5
7.6
16.3
6.0

2.9
4.9
15.2
3.0

–1.2
0.0
–3.5
0.7

–2.3
–3.3
–20.4
–0.2

10.4
15.3
39.9
12.0

12.9
18.5
36.9
15.7

–2.5
–6.4
–11.5
–5.4

0.5
–0.9
1.3
–1.2

0.5
–4.0
–7.0
–3.4

–0.2
–1.6
–4.3
–1.1

Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters

–0.1
1.2
1.8
1.2

2.3
3.2
3.5
3.2

4.7
5.4
3.5
5.7

3.4
4.5
2.0
4.8

–1.2
1.2
3.3
0.9

–3.3
–3.2
–0.8
–3.6

9.0
15.7
12.2
16.1

15.2
17.2
15.1
17.5

–2.8
–4.1
–1.6
–4.4

–0.2
0.2
2.5
–0.1

–0.4
–1.3
1.0
–1.6

0.0
–1.2
–0.5
–1.3

Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

0.2
0.0

0.1
–0.5

–0.2
2.1

–0.5
0.4

0.0
–1.2

1.1
–0.1

1.3
–0.3

–2.0
1.1

0.3
–2.3

0.7
–1.1

0.9
–2.7

–0.2
–0.3

0.9
–0.6
0.0
–2.4
0.3

–2.0
1.1
1.3
1.0
2.1

–2.0
3.2
4.5
10.6
9.0

–3.8
4.1
–0.8
11.1
3.5

–0.7
0.4
–0.5
–5.0
–1.7

5.5
–4.4
2.5
–17.9
2.5

–9.2
7.6
5.3
21.6
9.0

–1.4
2.8
–3.8
15.5
–1.0

–1.7
–4.9
5.6
–8.2
–5.8

–3.8
4.5
0.5
–0.7
3.4

–2.6
–1.6
–1.2
–6.6
1.7

–0.2
0.4
0.8
–3.2
1.1

By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel

–2.9
0.6

1.0
–0.7

12.4
0.3

13.0
–1.8

–6.6
–0.2

–19.8
3.5

24.7
–3.6

19.0
–1.5

–10.0
–1.0

–1.2
–1.2

–7.9
–1.8

–3.8
0.2

Memorandum
World Exports in Billions of US Dollars
Goods and Services
Goods
Average Oil Price3
In US Dollars a Barrel
Export Unit Value of Manufactures4

20,563
16,101
–3.9
81.2
0.4

28,587
21,348
4.3
68.5
1.6

22,877
17,324
22.5
53.0
0.1

25,078
18,977
29.4
68.5
2.0

24,696
18,417
–10.4
61.4
0.4

22,310
17,058
–32.0
41.8
–3.2

27,981
21,663
65.8
69.2
6.7

31,466
24,128
39.2
96.4
10.3

30,940
22,950
–16.4
80.6
–1.7

32,192
23,478
–1.8
79.2
1.3

33,593
24,390
–12.9
68.9
0.6

34,738
25,094
–4.5
65.8
–0.1

Trade in Goods (continued)
Volume of Trade
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Fuel Exporters
Nonfuel Exporters

Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups

Note: SDRs = special drawing rights.

1 Average of annual percent change for world exports and imports.

2 As represented, respectively, by the export unit value index for manufactures of the advanced economies and accounting for 82 percent of the advanced economies’ trade (export of goods)
weights; the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices; and the average of world market prices for nonfuel primary commodities weighted by their 2014–16
shares in world commodity imports.
3 Percent change of the average of UK Brent, Dubai Fateh, and West Texas Intermediate crude oil prices.
4 Percent change for manufactures exported by the advanced economies.

138

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

482.9
–367.6
430.4
303.5
–14.1
48.1
36.9
203.5
–93.7
–46.2
324.5

409.5
–439.0
412.0
341.7
–19.4
52.5
26.9
177.8
–112.9
–41.0
325.2

374.2
–442.0
324.7
311.8
16.3
63.8
29.9
176.3
–76.7
–34.1
330.7

128.1
–593.5
242.2
248.8
–54.2
71.7
10.2
149.9
–79.2
–33.4
369.9

448.0
–858.6
410.8
301.1
8.2
45.8
11.3
196.2
–13.7
–0.4
581.6

–264.6
–993.1
–20.3
160.2
–39.6
–36.3
6.1
89.9
–65.7
–6.7
567.6

–16.5
–928.0
264.5
251.8
–31.8
3.2
44.3
155.9
–118.3
–13.6
485.3

49.5
–1,185.3
430.6
263.8
2.9
26.8
54.8
193.7
–96.8
–10.3
591.3

–52.5
–1,220.8
409.3
271.7
–2.6
24.7
50.2
166.9
–122.3
–32.3
606.5

–9.5

–33.0

22.6

166.5

382.6

696.2

303.8

445.4

477.1

332.5

206.3

164.5
–20.9
–98.6
–23.2
–31.2

–51.0
67.9
–145.6
130.4
–34.7

93.7
53.5
–108.6
35.3
–51.2

323.6
2.9
–9.9
–106.0
–44.1

288.1
71.1
–92.3
131.2
–15.5

337.2
128.5
–128.2
403.0
–44.2

253.8
–18.3
–78.0
196.6
–50.4

421.9
–4.4
–64.1
119.9
–27.9

602.4
–71.7
–77.9
59.8
–35.6

492.0
–68.4
–83.5
31.9
–39.6

392.4
–61.5
–103.7
33.2
–54.1

By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products

54.9
–62.3
–29.7

218.8
–249.7
–45.6

85.3
–60.9
–41.3

–86.1
254.5
–3.7

192.2
192.2
–20.0

506.7
191.6
–60.7

263.2
42.9
–38.4

213.7
234.6
–19.5

133.8
346.2
–26.3

110.4
224.9
–28.6

130.1
79.1
–54.1

By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies

–304.6

–384.5

–297.4

–127.9

–297.6

–449.6

–272.4

–276.9

–354.5

–399.4

–521.8

Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2020–24

–63.1

–52.0

–51.1

–34.0

–40.4

–41.6

–50.3

–59.5

–85.9

–85.6

–73.1

473.4
493.2
–4.1
22.0
–31.5

376.5
512.3
147.1
24.2
–57.2

396.8
460.2
54.3
86.8
–64.2

294.7
375.7
–87.7
227.5
–61.0

830.7
572.9
133.5
450.0
–67.3

431.7
135.0
395.1
803.6
–107.3

287.3
471.0
217.2
388.7
–84.9

494.9
621.4
131.3
493.9
–48.5

424.5
604.0
71.5
513.0
–35.9

372.2
626.3
56.3
388.9
–56.4

299.0
672.9
73.0
296.5
–90.1

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies 1
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

2026

2030

39.7
92.7
–1,153.2 –1,282.4
419.4
454.1
271.3
254.0
–6.0
1.6
25.7
59.0
53.9
42.0
162.0
177.0
–125.1
–114.7
–31.5
–7.2
621.8
707.2

Analytical Groups

Memorandum
World
European Union
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

139

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies 1

1.0
–1.9
3.4
8.1
–0.5
2.4
2.8
4.1
–3.5
–2.8
4.5

0.8
–2.1
3.0
8.4
–0.7
2.5
1.9
3.5
–3.9
–2.4
4.3

0.7
–2.1
2.4
7.9
0.6
3.2
2.1
3.4
–2.7
–2.0
4.4

0.2
–2.8
1.8
6.3
–2.0
3.8
0.8
3.0
–2.9
–2.0
5.0

0.8
–3.6
2.8
6.9
0.3
2.1
0.8
3.9
–0.4
0.0
6.7

–0.4
–3.8
–0.1
3.8
–1.4
–1.7
0.4
2.1
–2.1
–0.3
6.5

0.0
–3.3
1.7
5.5
–1.0
0.1
2.7
3.7
–3.5
–0.6
5.5

0.1
–4.0
2.6
5.6
0.1
1.1
3.2
4.8
–2.7
–0.5
6.5

–0.1
–4.0
2.3
5.4
–0.1
1.0
2.7
3.9
–3.1
–1.4
6.3

0.1
–3.6
2.2
5.1
–0.2
1.0
2.6
3.6
–3.0
–1.3
6.1

0.1
–3.5
2.1
4.2
0.0
2.0
1.8
3.5
–2.2
–0.2
5.8

Emerging Market and Developing Economies

0.0

–0.1

0.1

0.5

0.9

1.6

0.7

1.0

1.0

0.6

0.3

0.9
–0.6
–1.8
–0.6
–1.7

–0.3
1.8
–2.7
3.3
–1.8

0.4
1.4
–2.1
0.9
–2.5

1.5
0.1
–0.2
–3.0
–2.4

1.2
1.6
–1.8
3.1
–0.7

1.3
2.6
–2.2
8.0
–2.0

1.0
–0.4
–1.2
4.0
–2.4

1.6
–0.1
–0.9
2.3
–1.5

2.2
–1.1
–1.1
1.1
–1.7

1.7
–1.0
–1.1
0.6
–1.8

1.0
–0.8
–1.2
0.5
–1.8

By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products

1.5
–0.2
–2.1

5.6
–0.8
–3.1

2.2
–0.2
–2.8

–2.6
0.8
–0.3

5.0
0.5
–1.3

10.6
0.5
–3.8

5.7
0.1
–2.3

4.7
0.6
–1.1

3.0
0.8
–1.4

2.3
0.5
–1.4

2.2
0.1
–2.2

By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies

–2.2

–2.7

–2.0

–0.9

–1.9

–2.7

–1.5

–1.5

–1.8

–1.9

–1.8

Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2020–24

–4.7

–3.7

–3.5

–2.3

–2.4

–2.4

–2.9

–3.3

–4.6

–4.3

–2.7

0.6
3.3
–0.1
0.1
–1.6

0.4
3.2
4.5
0.1
–2.7

0.4
2.9
1.7
0.3
–2.9

0.3
2.4
–3.1
0.7
–2.8

0.8
3.3
4.0
1.2
–2.9

0.4
0.8
9.6
2.0
–4.2

0.3
2.5
5.4
0.9
–3.4

0.4
3.2
3.2
1.1
–2.1

0.4
2.9
1.7
1.1
–1.4

0.3
2.8
1.3
0.8
–2.1

0.2
2.6
1.3
0.5
–2.4

Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups

Memorandum
World
European Union
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

140

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A10. Summary of Current Account Balances (continued)
(Percent of exports of goods and services)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
Japan
United Kingdom
Canada
Other Advanced Economies 1

3.3
–15.4
12.3
19.0
–1.7
8.1
8.0
23.2
–11.3
–8.9
8.0

2.6
–17.3
10.8
19.7
–2.1
8.1
5.4
19.1
–12.4
–7.4
7.4

2.4
–17.3
8.6
18.6
1.8
10.2
6.1
19.5
–8.5
–6.0
7.8

0.9
–27.3
7.0
16.1
–7.3
13.1
2.6
18.9
–9.9
–6.8
9.4

2.6
–33.2
9.8
16.2
0.9
6.7
2.3
21.3
–1.5
–0.1
11.7

–1.4
–32.5
–0.5
8.3
–3.9
–4.9
1.1
9.7
–6.3
–0.9
10.3

–0.1
–30.0
5.8
12.9
–3.0
0.4
7.2
16.9
–11.0
–1.9
9.2

0.2
–36.7
9.2
13.6
0.3
3.4
8.6
21.0
–8.7
–1.4
10.7

–0.3
–36.4
...
13.1
–0.2
3.1
7.1
17.8
–10.3
–4.6
10.3

0.2
–35.2
...
12.7
–0.6
3.1
7.1
17.0
–9.9
–4.3
10.0

0.4
–36.1
...
10.9
0.1
6.5
4.5
17.0
–7.7
–0.8
9.8

Emerging Market and Developing Economies

–0.2

–0.5

0.2

2.1

3.5

5.5

2.5

3.6

3.7

2.5

1.3

4.0
–1.6
–8.3
–2.1
–8.4

–1.1
4.5
–11.4
7.7
–8.2

2.1
3.6
–8.6
2.1
–12.3

7.4
0.2
–0.9
–9.1
–13.1

5.1
4.1
–6.6
8.3
–3.5

5.5
6.6
–7.7
18.6
–8.4

4.3
–1.0
–4.7
9.4
–10.2

6.7
–0.2
–3.7
5.9
–5.4

9.2
–3.7
–4.3
2.8
–6.4

7.3
–3.4
–4.5
1.4
–6.7

4.9
–2.5
–4.7
1.2
–7.4

By Source of Export Earnings
Fuel
Nonfuel
Of Which, Primary Products

3.9
–0.9
–7.9

13.5
–3.3
–11.2

5.7
–0.8
–10.5

–7.8
3.5
–1.0

12.7
2.1
–4.1

24.2
1.9
–11.5

13.3
0.4
–7.5

10.9
2.2
–3.6

6.7
3.1
–4.5

5.3
2.0
–4.6

5.0
0.6
–7.3

By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies

–9.0

–10.3

–8.0

–3.9

–7.1

–9.0

–5.4

–5.3

–6.5

–7.0

–7.5

Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2020–24

–17.9

–12.9

–12.7

–9.9

–9.3

–8.5

–10.7

–12.3

–16.5

–15.5

–10.1

2.0
7.0
–0.7
0.2
–9.3

1.5
6.6
9.9
0.1
–14.9

1.6
6.0
3.8
0.9
–15.8

1.3
5.3
–8.5
2.9
–17.9

2.9
6.6
9.6
4.3
–16.3

1.3
1.4
20.7
6.7
–21.7

0.9
4.9
11.8
3.3
–17.4

1.5
6.3
7.3
4.1
–9.4

1.3
5.8
3.8
4.1
–6.3

1.1
5.7
2.8
3.0
–9.0

0.7
5.4
2.9
1.9
–10.9

Regional Groups
Emerging and Developing Asia
Emerging and Developing Europe
Latin America and the Caribbean
Middle East and Central Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
Analytical Groups

Memorandum
World
European Union
Middle East and North Africa
Emerging Market and Middle-Income Economies
Low-Income Developing Countries

1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

141

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A11. Advanced Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

1.0
–1.9
3.4
8.1
–0.5
2.4
2.8
8.1

0.8
–2.1
3.0
8.4
–0.7
2.5
1.9
8.8

0.7
–2.1
2.4
7.9
0.6
3.2
2.1
6.8

0.2
–2.8
1.8
6.3
–2.0
3.8
0.8
5.7

0.8
–3.6
2.8
6.9
0.3
2.1
0.8
10.2

–0.4
–3.8
–0.1
3.8
–1.4
–1.7
0.4
6.8

0.0
–3.3
1.7
5.5
–1.0
0.1
2.7
9.4

0.1
–4.0
2.6
5.6
0.1
1.1
3.2
9.1

–0.1
–4.0
2.3
5.4
–0.1
1.0
2.7
9.5

0.1
–3.6
2.2
5.1
–0.2
1.0
2.6
9.3

0.1
–3.5
2.1
4.2
0.0
2.0
1.8
9.4

Belgium
Ireland
Austria
Portugal
Greece

0.7
1.1
1.3
1.5
–2.6

–0.9
4.3
0.8
0.8
–3.6

0.1
–20.7
2.4
0.8
–2.2

0.9
–7.1
3.4
–0.7
–7.2

1.8
12.2
1.7
–0.7
–7.0

–1.3
8.8
–0.9
–2.0
–10.7

–0.7
7.0
1.3
0.6
–6.7

–0.9
16.2
2.4
2.1
–7.0

–0.9
11.1
1.8
1.8
–5.8

–0.9
11.5
2.2
1.9
–5.3

–0.2
9.6
2.6
1.1
–3.1

Finland
Slovak Republic
Croatia
Lithuania
Slovenia

–0.7
–1.7
3.4
1.0
6.8

–1.6
–1.6
1.1
0.4
6.5

–0.1
–3.5
2.5
3.8
6.4

0.4
–0.5
–1.3
7.2
7.3

0.3
–4.8
0.5
1.4
3.5

–2.4
–9.6
–3.5
–6.1
–0.9

–0.8
–1.7
0.4
1.1
4.8

0.0
–2.8
–1.2
2.5
4.5

0.1
–2.9
–1.6
2.1
2.9

–0.1
–2.5
–2.0
2.1
2.9

–0.3
–1.0
–0.7
2.0
2.8

Luxembourg
Latvia
Estonia
Cyprus
Malta

6.4
1.5
1.7
–5.0
18.9

8.3
–0.4
0.6
–3.9
13.3

8.5
–0.2
2.0
–5.5
17.9

4.9
3.0
–2.5
–9.7
16.0

6.4
–4.1
–3.7
–5.5
9.4

6.5
–5.5
–3.1
–6.9
–0.8

5.5
–3.8
–1.2
–11.3
6.3

6.9
–1.6
–1.2
–8.4
5.5

12.2
–2.1
–0.9
–8.5
5.1

12.4
–2.3
–2.2
–9.1
4.4

12.0
–2.5
–1.4
–10.0
3.4

Japan
United Kingdom
Korea
Canada
Australia

4.1
–3.5
4.4
–2.8
–2.8

3.5
–3.9
4.2
–2.4
–2.6

3.4
–2.7
3.4
–2.0
0.0

3.0
–2.9
4.4
–2.0
1.7

3.9
–0.4
4.4
0.0
2.4

2.1
–2.1
1.4
–0.3
0.4

3.7
–3.5
1.8
–0.6
–0.2

4.8
–2.7
5.3
–0.5
–1.9

3.9
–3.1
4.8
–1.4
–1.8

3.6
–3.0
3.9
–1.3
–1.7

3.5
–2.2
4.7
–0.2
–2.0

Taiwan Province of China
Singapore
Switzerland
Sweden
Czech Republic

14.0
18.6
5.3
2.2
1.5

11.6
15.7
6.1
2.1
0.4

10.7
15.4
4.1
5.2
0.3

14.4
17.5
0.6
5.6
1.8

15.0
19.8
7.7
6.2
–2.1

13.2
18.4
9.3
4.0
–4.7

14.0
17.7
5.9
5.8
–0.1

14.1
17.5
7.7
5.9
1.7

13.8
17.4
7.0
5.8
0.6

13.1
17.3
7.0
5.7
0.4

12.8
16.9
7.5
4.5
0.0

Norway
Hong Kong SAR
Israel
Denmark
New Zealand

6.3
4.6
3.2
7.3
–2.9

9.0
3.7
2.6
6.3
–4.2

3.8
5.9
2.8
7.4
–2.9

1.1
7.0
3.7
7.2
–1.1

14.9
11.8
3.2
8.5
–6.0

29.6
10.2
2.7
11.2
–9.2

17.4
8.5
3.1
11.0
–6.9

16.7
13.0
2.8
12.2
–6.1

16.2
12.5
2.8
12.2
–4.7

15.9
12.2
3.0
11.7
–4.4

12.9
11.5
2.8
11.2
–3.4

Puerto Rico
Macao SAR
Iceland
Liechtenstein
Andorra
San Marino

...
30.8
4.9
31.1
...
–0.4

...
32.9
4.4
24.0
...
–1.9

...
33.5
7.4
16.1
18.0
2.0

...
14.8
1.9
17.7
15.5
2.8

...
8.7
–2.6
17.0
15.0
5.4

...
13.9
–1.7
14.3
11.6
13.6

...
31.4
–1.0
15.5
14.2
22.0

...
35.8
–2.6
14.6
15.0
18.3

...
35.5
–3.6
13.2
15.2
17.5

...
34.9
–1.1
12.9
15.3
17.8

...
33.2
0.7
11.9
15.4
15.1

Memorandum
Major Advanced Economies
Euro Area2

0.1
3.6

–0.1
3.6

0.0
3.1

–0.7
2.4

–0.7
3.6

–2.0
1.0

–1.4
2.5

–1.6
3.4

–1.8
3.1

–1.6
3.0

–1.4
2.9

Advanced Economies
United States
Euro Area1
Germany
France
Italy
Spain
The Netherlands

Note: SAR = Special Administrative Region.

1 Data are corrected for reporting discrepancies in intra-area transactions.

2 Data are calculated as the sum of the balances of individual euro area countries.

142

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Emerging and Developing Asia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China

0.9
–0.5
–22.0
16.4
–6.4
1.5

–0.3
–3.0
–17.4
6.9
–8.9
0.2

0.4
–1.3
–19.2
6.6
–8.2
0.7

1.5
–1.5
–14.8
4.3
–1.0
1.6

1.2
–1.1
–11.2
11.1
–29.6
1.9

1.3
–4.0
–29.5
19.5
–19.4
2.4

1.0
–2.6
–37.0
12.9
1.3
1.4

1.6
–1.4
–23.6
14.4
0.5
2.3

2.2
0.0
–16.8
16.4
–2.5
3.3

1.7
–0.9
–18.0
16.6
–3.9
2.8

1.0
–2.0
–22.3
16.4
–2.6
2.1

Fiji
India
Indonesia
Kiribati
Lao P.D.R.

–6.6
–1.8
–1.6
31.6
–7.4

–8.4
–2.1
–2.9
32.6
–9.1

–11.8
–0.9
–2.7
40.0
–7.0

–12.0
0.9
–0.4
32.2
–1.6

–6.5
–1.2
0.3
7.1
2.3

–15.3
–2.0
1.0
–12.0
–3.0

–6.6
–0.7
–0.1
–1.8
2.7

–7.8
–0.6
–0.6
–19.3
3.3

–7.5
–1.0
–1.1
–10.5
5.3

–7.1
–1.4
–1.2
–8.6
2.7

–5.6
–1.9
–1.1
–7.5
0.1

Malaysia
Maldives
Marshall Islands
Micronesia
Mongolia

2.8
–20.7
–0.9
10.4
–10.1

2.2
–27.8
–2.0
21.4
–16.7

3.5
–26.1
–31.2
16.1
–15.2

4.2
–35.1
14.9
–5.8
–5.1

3.9
–8.7
22.7
2.3
–13.8

3.2
–16.3
10.0
8.9
–13.4

1.1
–21.2
16.8
3.9
0.6

1.4
–17.8
14.0
1.1
–10.4

1.5
–12.5
10.3
–0.9
–14.4

1.8
–11.2
4.0
–3.5
–13.0

2.1
–8.4
3.4
–4.6
–12.5

Myanmar
Nauru
Nepal
Palau
Papua New Guinea

–5.5
12.4
–0.3
–22.9
15.9

–1.3
7.6
–7.1
–18.6
13.6

–2.5
4.6
–6.9
–30.4
14.4

–0.4
2.5
–1.0
–43.8
14.4

–2.2
3.8
–7.7
–43.8
12.6

–2.9
1.9
–12.6
–49.2
14.4

–1.9
1.3
–0.9
–48.9
9.1

–1.1
6.2
3.9
–22.2
15.2

–2.3
2.7
6.6
–15.0
10.8

–3.6
2.4
–0.8
–14.2
12.7

–4.3
2.0
–3.5
–14.0
11.5

Philippines
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Sri Lanka1
Thailand

–0.7
–1.8
–4.3
–2.4
9.6

–2.6
0.8
–3.0
–3.0
5.6

–0.8
2.8
–9.5
–2.1
7.0

3.2
0.9
–1.6
–1.4
4.2

–1.5
–14.6
–5.1
–3.7
–2.1

–4.5
–10.6
–13.7
–1.0
–3.5

–2.8
–3.0
–10.4
2.9
1.4

–4.0
4.4
–3.7
1.8
2.5

–3.8
4.5
–4.6
...
1.7

–3.5
–1.5
–7.4
...
1.3

–2.8
–2.1
–7.5
...
2.7

Timor-Leste1
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Vietnam

–17.9
–7.1
1.7
–8.4
–0.6

–12.3
–7.0
59.3
2.8
1.9

21.9
–3.8
–16.5
5.2
3.8

23.8
–5.7
16.2
–6.4
4.3

46.8
–6.3
29.8
–11.7
–2.2

12.7
–5.4
–0.3
–17.6
0.3

–8.5
–5.9
40.0
–6.6
6.4

–28.0
–3.8
7.3
–15.4
6.6

–31.1
–5.2
15.1
–11.6
4.0

–32.3
–6.4
5.7
–11.6
2.4

–33.9
–6.9
–4.9
–5.0
1.1

Emerging and Developing Europe
Albania
Belarus
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Hungary

–0.6
–7.5
–1.7
–4.8
3.2
1.8

1.8
–6.7
0.0
–3.2
0.7
0.2

1.4
–7.5
–1.9
–2.6
1.7
–0.6

0.1
–8.6
–0.3
–2.8
0.4
–0.9

1.6
–7.7
3.2
–1.8
–1.1
–4.1

2.6
–5.8
3.4
–4.4
–2.7
–8.5

–0.4
–1.2
–1.8
–2.3
–0.9
0.3

–0.1
–2.4
–3.2
–4.0
–1.6
2.2

–1.1
–2.4
–1.8
–3.9
–3.8
1.2

–1.0
–2.7
–3.1
–3.9
–3.2
0.9

–0.8
–2.6
–2.5
–3.9
–0.1
1.7

Kosovo
Moldova
Montenegro
North Macedonia
Poland

–5.3
–5.8
–16.3
–0.8
–1.2

–7.6
–10.8
–17.2
0.2
–2.0

–5.7
–9.4
–14.4
–3.0
–0.3

–7.0
–7.7
–26.3
–2.9
2.4

–8.7
–12.4
–9.3
–2.8
–1.3

–10.5
–17.1
–12.9
–6.1
–2.3

–7.5
–11.3
–11.2
0.4
1.8

–8.7
–16.0
–17.1
–2.3
0.0

–9.2
–19.3
–18.1
–3.6
–0.7

–8.3
–20.4
–17.5
–3.1
–0.8

–7.3
–14.8
–15.6
–2.5
–1.6

Romania
Russia
Serbia
Türkiye
Ukraine

–3.2
2.0
–5.0
–4.1
–2.2

–4.6
7.0
–4.6
–1.8
–3.3

–4.9
3.9
–6.6
1.9
–2.7

–5.1
2.4
–3.9
–4.2
3.3

–7.2
6.8
–4.1
–0.8
–1.9

–9.5
10.4
–6.5
–5.0
4.9

–6.6
2.4
–2.3
–3.6
–5.3

–8.4
2.9
–4.7
–0.8
–7.2

–8.0
1.7
–5.3
–1.4
–16.5

–6.6
1.6
–5.3
–1.3
–12.6

–5.0
1.4
–4.8
–1.3
–4.3

Latin America and the Caribbean
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
The Bahamas
Barbados

–1.8
–7.7
–4.8
1.0
–13.3
–3.4

–2.7
–14.0
–5.2
–0.5
–9.4
–3.6

–2.1
–6.5
–0.8
0.2
–2.1
–1.6

–0.2
–15.6
0.7
–17.3
–22.0
–5.0

–1.8
–17.8
1.4
–2.3
–20.2
–10.3

–2.2
–15.6
–0.6
6.5
–8.9
–9.9

–1.2
–13.5
–3.2
5.6
–7.0
–8.8

–0.9
–8.2
0.9
9.5
–7.6
–4.5

–1.1
–11.0
–1.2
10.1
–7.6
–6.3

–1.1
–10.4
–0.4
9.2
–7.3
–5.7

–1.2
–8.7
0.3
6.7
–6.0
–5.0

Belize
Bolivia1
Brazil
Chile
Colombia

–7.0
–5.0
–1.2
–2.8
–3.2

–6.6
–4.3
–2.8
–4.5
–4.2

–7.8
–3.3
–3.5
–5.2
–4.6

–6.2
0.0
–1.7
–1.9
–3.4

–6.5
3.9
–2.4
–7.3
–5.6

–8.3
2.6
–2.2
–8.8
–6.0

–0.6
–2.5
–1.3
–3.1
–2.3

–1.6
–3.0
–2.7
–1.5
–1.7

–1.7
–3.4
–2.5
–2.5
–2.3

–1.6
...
–2.3
–2.2
–2.6

–1.4
...
–1.7
–2.9
–3.6

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

143

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Latin America and the
Caribbean (continued)
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador

–1.8
–3.6
–11.0
–0.2
–0.4
–1.9

–2.7
–3.0
–46.7
–1.6
–1.5
–3.3

–2.1
–1.2
–38.1
–1.3
–0.5
–0.4

–0.2
–1.0
–37.0
–1.7
2.1
1.1

–1.8
–3.2
–33.5
–2.8
2.8
–4.3

–2.2
–3.3
–27.0
–5.8
1.9
–6.7

–1.2
–1.4
–34.2
–3.7
1.9
–1.1

–0.9
–1.4
–33.4
–3.3
5.7
–1.8

–1.1
–1.9
–32.9
–2.5
4.9
–0.8

–1.1
–2.1
–26.4
–2.5
3.4
–1.8

–1.2
–1.7
–13.8
–2.5
2.8
–1.4

Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras

–11.5
1.2
–4.9
–2.2
–1.2

–12.8
0.9
–29.0
–2.9
–6.6

–10.3
2.4
–68.8
–1.1
–2.6

–16.1
5.0
–17.3
0.4
2.9

–14.4
2.2
–24.8
0.4
–5.5

–12.1
1.2
25.9
–2.5
–6.7

–18.2
3.1
9.9
–3.5
–3.9

–16.3
2.9
16.4
–0.6
–4.4

–15.9
3.9
7.9
0.0
–0.4

–13.9
2.2
11.8
–0.6
–2.5

–12.3
0.0
25.3
–2.0
–4.0

Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay

–2.5
–1.8
–7.2
–5.8
3.4

–1.4
–2.1
–1.8
–7.9
–0.2

–1.8
–0.3
5.9
–5.1
–0.6

–1.0
2.4
3.8
0.2
1.9

0.9
–0.3
–2.8
–1.2
–1.1

–0.7
–1.3
–2.9
0.0
–7.0

2.7
–0.7
8.2
–3.1
–0.4

3.1
–0.9
4.2
1.9
–3.9

1.8
–0.2
7.1
–0.9
–3.5

0.4
–0.3
2.1
–1.7
–3.7

0.3
–0.6
–2.9
–2.5
–1.2

Peru
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname

–0.9
–10.3
–1.9
–11.9
1.9

–1.2
–5.8
1.5
–10.3
–2.8

–0.7
–4.8
3.3
–2.4
–11.2

0.7
–10.8
–18.8
–15.9
9.0

–2.2
–3.4
–11.3
–23.2
5.7

–4.0
–11.4
–3.6
–20.6
1.9

0.3
–11.5
–1.6
–16.9
4.3

2.2
–14.4
–1.0
–18.4
0.2

1.8
–14.5
–1.5
–15.8
–33.4

1.2
–14.0
–1.0
–13.5
–51.8

–1.5
–12.5
–0.5
–8.9
28.2

5.9
0.0
7.5

6.8
–0.5
8.4

4.3
1.3
5.9

–6.5
–0.6
–3.2

10.9
–2.4
–0.9

17.5
–3.8
4.0

11.8
–3.4
5.8

4.8
–1.0
4.9

4.9
–1.4
4.2

2.9
–1.5
2.5

7.0
–1.7
...

Middle East and Central Asia
Afghanistan1
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain

–0.6
7.6
–11.8
–1.3
4.1
–3.9

3.3
12.1
–8.7
–7.2
12.8
–6.2

0.9
11.7
–8.7
–7.1
9.1
–2.0

–3.0
14.0
–11.3
–4.0
–0.5
–9.1

3.1
–0.1
–2.4
–3.4
15.1
6.4

8.0
–18.5
8.4
0.7
29.8
14.7

4.0
–20.3
2.4
–2.8
11.5
5.8

2.3
...
–1.1
–4.6
6.3
4.8

1.1
...
–3.7
–4.7
4.3
3.5

0.6
...
–3.8
–4.7
2.3
3.8

0.5
...
–2.7
–4.3
–0.8
2.7

Djibouti
Egypt
Georgia
Iran
Iraq

–4.8
–5.8
–7.9
2.9
1.4

14.7
–2.3
–6.7
7.6
10.5

18.3
–3.4
–6.0
–0.7
6.2

11.7
–2.9
–12.4
–1.7
–5.6

–6.6
–4.4
–10.3
3.6
6.1

19.0
–3.5
–4.4
3.5
15.8

18.1
–1.2
–5.6
2.0
7.5

14.1
–5.4
–4.4
3.2
–0.2

8.1
–5.1
–4.5
1.8
0.4

7.6
–4.3
–4.6
2.0
–1.1

8.3
–3.8
–4.9
3.0
0.9

Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyz Republic
Lebanon1

–10.6
–2.1
8.0
–6.2
–22.9

–6.8
–1.0
14.3
–12.1
–24.3

–1.7
–3.9
12.7
–11.5
–21.8

–5.7
–6.5
4.4
4.5
–11.1

–8.0
–1.4
25.2
–8.0
–23.0

–8.1
2.9
34.4
–41.9
–30.0

–3.6
–3.6
31.1
–44.9
–24.9

–5.9
–1.7
29.1
–25.3
–19.7

–5.5
–3.8
26.5
–8.4
...

–5.9
–4.0
24.4
–7.7
...

–4.7
–2.6
19.2
–6.2
...

Libya
Mauritania
Morocco
Oman
Pakistan1

6.6
–10.0
–3.2
–13.6
–3.6

14.7
–13.1
–4.9
–4.9
–5.4

6.7
–10.5
–3.4
–4.9
–4.2

–10.2
–6.8
–1.2
–16.5
–1.5

16.1
–8.6
–2.3
–5.5
–0.8

23.2
–14.9
–3.5
3.7
–4.7

18.3
–8.7
–1.0
2.3
–1.0

–4.2
–9.4
–1.2
2.9
–0.6

0.9
–7.2
–2.3
–1.0
0.5

0.6
–7.1
–2.6
–0.7
–0.4

0.4
–7.4
–3.0
2.0
–1.1

Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Somalia
Sudan1
Syria1

4.0
1.6
–3.6
–9.4
...

9.1
8.2
–3.2
–13.9
...

2.4
4.3
–9.7
–15.2
...

–2.1
–3.3
–4.7
–16.6
...

14.6
4.1
–7.1
–7.5
...

26.8
12.1
–8.6
–11.3
...

17.1
2.9
–8.9
–3.8
...

17.4
–0.5
–9.2
–3.3
...

10.8
–2.1
–9.5
–3.1
...

10.2
–2.5
–8.8
–7.7
...

11.6
–2.8
–10.1
–10.7
...

Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan

2.1
–9.7
–16.4
6.8
2.1

–4.9
–10.8
7.4
9.4
–6.1

–2.2
–8.1
3.4
8.6
–5.0

4.3
–6.0
–1.4
5.9
–4.6

8.2
–6.0
4.6
11.4
–6.3

15.3
–9.0
9.7
13.0
–3.2

4.8
–2.7
5.9
13.1
–7.6

6.2
–1.7
4.4
14.5
–5.0

3.4
–3.1
2.3
13.2
–2.4

–0.4
–3.3
0.7
12.3
–4.6

–2.0
–4.1
–3.6
10.9
–4.8

West Bank and Gaza1
Yemen

–13.2
–1.5

–13.2
–3.2

–10.4
–4.2

–12.3
–15.7

–9.8
–13.9

–10.6
–15.1

–13.0
–11.8

–21.1
–17.1

...
–9.6

...
–9.5

...
4.0

Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela1

144

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A12. Emerging Market and Developing Economies: Current Account Balance (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2030

Sub-Saharan Africa
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi

–1.7
–0.5
–4.2
5.6
–5.0
–11.8

–1.8
6.5
–4.5
0.4
–4.2
–12.8

–2.5
5.4
–3.9
–6.9
–3.3
–11.6

–2.4
1.3
–1.7
–9.8
4.2
–11.2

–0.7
10.0
–4.2
–1.8
0.4
–12.6

–2.0
8.3
–5.7
–0.6
–7.5
–16.8

–2.4
3.7
–8.2
1.5
–5.1
–14.8

–1.5
5.4
–6.6
–4.2
–5.7
–8.6

–1.7
0.9
–5.5
–7.6
–1.6
–6.7

–1.8
0.5
–5.0
–5.9
–1.3
–5.8

–1.8
0.9
–4.2
–1.1
–3.9
–8.9

Cabo Verde
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros

–7.0
–2.6
–7.4
–5.7
–2.2

–4.8
–3.5
–7.7
–4.0
–3.0

0.2
–4.3
–4.6
–3.0
–3.5

–15.4
–3.7
–7.9
–2.5
–1.8

–12.1
–4.0
–10.8
–0.5
–0.3

–3.5
–3.4
–12.6
6.3
–0.4

–2.7
–4.1
–8.8
1.6
–1.5

3.8
–3.1
–9.1
1.0
–2.2

–0.9
–3.4
–7.1
–2.3
–2.2

–2.3
–3.9
–4.1
–2.9
–3.2

–3.4
–3.6
–2.5
–2.8
–2.2

Democratic Republic of the Congo
Republic of Congo
Côte d’Ivoire
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea1

–3.1
–6.4
–2.0
–7.8
24.8

–3.5
18.5
–3.9
–2.7
15.5

–3.2
11.7
–2.2
–7.5
13.0

–2.0
12.6
–3.1
–0.8
...

–1.0
12.8
–3.9
5.7
...

–4.9
17.0
–7.6
6.6
...

–6.2
4.7
–8.2
–3.5
...

–3.9
0.1
–4.2
–3.3
...

–3.3
–5.9
–2.1
–3.0
...

–2.1
–7.0
–1.7
–3.8
...

–3.2
–7.5
–2.4
–3.0
...

Eswatini
Ethiopia
Gabon
The Gambia
Ghana

6.2
–8.5
–0.7
–7.4
–3.3

1.4
–6.5
7.1
–9.5
–3.0

3.8
–5.3
4.6
–6.1
–2.2

6.8
–4.6
–0.5
–5.8
–2.5

2.7
–3.2
3.5
–4.2
–2.7

–2.7
–4.3
10.9
–4.2
–2.3

2.4
–2.9
8.0
–5.6
–1.6

1.3
–4.2
4.0
–6.7
1.1

–1.7
–2.9
1.8
–4.9
1.8

–1.4
–2.6
–0.3
–4.6
1.7

0.5
–1.8
–3.5
–1.3
–0.1

Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia

–6.7
0.3
–5.6
–7.0
–22.3

–18.5
–3.5
–4.0
–7.0
–21.3

–15.5
–8.5
–2.2
–6.3
–19.6

–16.1
–2.6
–3.7
–5.7
–16.3

4.1
–0.8
–5.1
–9.1
–17.6

–5.7
–8.6
–5.1
–14.0
–19.6

–9.7
–8.6
–3.6
–0.8
–25.2

–14.0
–8.2
–2.3
2.3
–10.9

–9.7
–6.0
–2.8
–3.9
–13.1

–2.3
–5.3
–3.4
–2.5
–11.8

–0.1
–4.0
–3.0
–1.1
–12.3

Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique

–0.4
–15.5
–7.3
–4.5
–19.5

0.7
–12.0
–4.9
–3.8
–29.5

–2.3
–12.6
–7.5
–5.0
–16.1

–5.4
–13.8
–2.2
–8.9
–26.5

–4.9
–15.2
–7.6
–13.1
–21.3

–5.4
–17.6
–7.7
–11.1
–36.4

–4.1
–17.3
–7.6
–5.1
–10.9

–5.4
–21.9
–4.6
–6.5
–11.0

–6.0
–18.3
–4.6
–4.8
–39.9

–6.5
–16.4
–2.6
–5.7
–36.6

–5.0
–10.1
–4.5
–1.7
–15.0

Namibia
Niger
Nigeria1
Rwanda
São Tomé and Príncipe

–4.4
–11.4
2.6
–9.5
–15.3

–3.6
–12.7
1.2
–10.1
–13.0

–1.8
–12.2
–2.0
–11.9
–12.8

3.0
–13.2
–2.7
–12.1
–11.2

–11.2
–14.1
–0.5
–10.9
–13.1

–12.8
–16.2
0.2
–9.4
–14.5

–15.3
–13.9
1.3
–11.5
–12.3

–15.4
–6.0
6.8
–12.7
–1.9

–14.7
–3.3
5.7
–13.8
–3.3

–12.1
–5.2
3.6
–15.9
–3.6

–9.9
–4.0
1.3
–7.6
–3.7

Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
South Sudan

–7.3
0.3
–11.7
–2.4
23.7

–8.8
–2.4
–9.3
–2.9
–11.4

–7.9
–2.8
–7.8
–2.6
–4.8

–10.9
–12.5
–5.8
2.0
–31.7

–12.1
–10.5
–7.3
3.7
–0.1

–20.0
–7.5
–6.4
–0.3
–7.9

–19.8
–6.5
–9.5
–1.1
–18.4

–12.5
–8.1
–3.8
–0.7
–13.9

–8.0
–6.6
–3.4
–0.9
–3.8

–5.4
–6.9
–2.0
–1.2
4.4

–4.9
–8.0
–3.3
–1.9
6.0

Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

–2.8
–1.5
–4.8
–1.7
–0.9

–4.2
–2.6
–6.1
–1.3
–2.6

–2.3
–0.8
–6.9
0.5
2.3

–2.3
–0.3
–9.5
11.8
1.7

–3.5
–2.2
–8.4
11.9
0.7

–7.4
–3.5
–8.6
3.7
0.6

–3.8
–4.0
–7.6
–3.0
0.3

–2.6
–3.2
–7.5
–2.6
1.0

–2.6
–1.8
–5.0
1.3
3.1

–2.7
–0.6
–3.7
2.7
3.6

–2.8
0.2
–1.6
3.3
3.1

1 See the country-specific notes for Afghanistan, Bolivia, Eritrea, Lebanon, Nigeria, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Syria, Timor-Leste, Venezuela, and West Bank and Gaza in the “Country Notes”

section of the Statistical Appendix.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

145

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances
(Billions of US dollars)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

398.4
231.8
24.0
37.9
–144.6
249.1

477.3
–117.0
503.0
50.9
–90.7
131.2

126.2
1.0
61.1
3.7
–8.2
69.9

–42.8
48.7
121.9
71.1
–643.8
360.5

445.5
678.9
274.4
42.5
–1,184.1
635.3

–118.1
484.8
–763.1
5.4
366.3
–210.8

–139.2
324.9
–415.8
–15.4
10.7
–42.5

165.7
436.6
–352.8
60.6
–1.9
23.7

–76.3
268.4
–682.6
103.6
79.3
155.5

42.6
333.1
–393.2
59.5
–127.4
171.0

United States
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–373.2
28.6
–250.1
24.0
–174.1
–1.7

–302.9
–345.4
78.8
–20.4
–20.8
5.0

–558.4
–201.1
–244.9
–41.7
–75.4
4.7

–672.0
145.3
–540.2
–5.1
–280.9
9.0

–825.6
–135.8
97.4
–39.0
–862.2
114.0

–875.6
–28.0
–438.3
–80.7
–334.4
5.8

–1,073.0
–10.9
–1,184.1
–15.6
137.5
0.0

–1,128.6
25.1
–961.1
–42.3
–152.4
2.1

–1,240.8
–145.0
–966.0
32.5
–164.3
2.0

–1,154.5
–95.7
–639.9
–26.0
–392.9
0.0

Euro Area
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

377.0
18.6
407.0
7.6
–54.7
–1.5

358.1
130.1
268.3
60.8
–131.0
29.9

237.8
67.7
–104.9
–9.8
278.2
6.6

226.0
–191.2
525.7
21.7
–145.4
15.2

420.4
488.1
300.0
75.5
–597.5
154.3

61.4
266.0
–263.5
112.8
–72.7
18.9

337.4
51.3
–59.1
8.8
349.8
–13.4

508.1
172.4
–80.4
51.2
359.8
5.0

...
...
...
...
...
...

...
...
...
...
...
...

Germany
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

310.3
41.7
220.7
12.6
36.8
–1.4

308.5
46.7
177.4
26.8
57.1
0.5

224.9
95.5
82.9
23.0
24.1
–0.6

192.8
–31.4
19.7
106.3
98.2
–0.1

242.7
86.7
237.7
58.3
–177.7
37.7

158.8
64.2
14.6
47.0
28.4
4.7

211.4
26.1
2.3
38.7
143.3
1.0

273.8
32.8
34.0
45.5
163.1
–1.6

271.7
46.8
21.5
47.1
156.3
0.0

271.3
39.2
20.7
46.0
165.4
0.0

France
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–30.4
2.8
11.8
–1.4
–40.2
–3.4

–13.3
60.9
7.8
–30.5
–63.7
12.3

0.4
31.0
–75.1
4.1
37.1
3.2

–69.9
10.5
–33.2
–27.2
–24.6
4.6

1.8
21.0
11.0
21.0
–78.2
27.0

–43.9
–10.5
–90.2
–41.3
96.0
2.0

–39.4
51.9
–129.6
–18.0
78.1
–21.7

–7.5
–10.5
55.1
–28.0
–25.6
1.5

3.5
14.2
53.6
–18.6
–49.3
3.7

0.3
28.5
44.7
–13.8
–64.0
5.0

Italy
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

63.5
2.9
103.1
–8.4
–37.1
3.0

44.6
–3.6
157.1
–3.3
–108.7
3.1

61.6
4.0
–55.7
3.0
106.7
3.6

85.6
23.9
133.5
–2.9
–73.4
4.6

53.5
31.2
148.8
–0.2
–150.7
24.5

–8.3
–14.3
178.5
12.2
–186.8
2.1

34.0
–11.5
–26.9
–5.0
74.4
3.0

55.2
12.3
–79.8
3.8
116.5
2.3

26.1
3.7
–16.9
2.2
37.2
0.0

27.2
4.1
–24.2
1.4
45.9
0.0

Spain
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

40.2
14.9
36.9
8.7
–24.5
4.1

36.7
–21.2
28.3
–1.1
28.1
2.6

30.0
10.4
–56.7
–6.2
81.7
0.8

12.1
18.8
87.8
–8.1
–86.0
–0.4

30.6
–13.7
44.5
1.0
–13.4
12.2

19.5
0.9
29.7
2.1
–17.9
4.7

58.7
3.8
–24.8
–7.1
80.3
6.5

90.8
28.9
–6.4
1.3
65.6
1.4

66.5
30.7
32.4
0.0
3.4
0.0

75.2
32.5
33.2
0.0
9.4
0.0

Advanced Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

146

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Japan
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

168.3
155.0
–50.6
30.4
10.0
23.6

183.9
134.6
92.2
0.9
–67.9
24.0

228.3
218.9
87.4
3.2
–106.7
25.5

132.2
87.5
38.5
7.8
–12.4
10.9

153.3
174.7
–198.3
19.9
94.1
62.8

53.1
126.7
–142.6
38.0
78.4
–47.4

174.3
176.1
195.3
44.6
–271.5
29.8

170.7
190.6
93.0
29.1
–77.7
–64.4

164.8
178.2
–22.6
27.9
–30.2
11.5

159.8
183.3
–20.5
31.9
–46.4
11.5

United Kingdom
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–102.4
46.1
–92.8
19.3
–83.7
8.8

–124.0
–4.9
–354.9
10.3
200.7
24.8

–98.5
–42.2
34.9
2.5
–92.5
–1.1

–93.8
–140.4
36.5
33.1
–19.7
–3.3

–14.2
156.8
–261.9
–37.5
104.0
24.4

–78.6
80.7
–44.9
–59.8
–53.2
–1.3

–114.5
15.0
217.2
1.3
–343.3
–4.6

–79.6
65.3
–41.8
–7.6
–92.6
–3.0

–128.5
7.9
–214.8
6.9
62.5
9.0

–132.1
8.5
–229.2
7.4
74.1
7.2

Canada
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–44.2
53.4
–74.9
...
–23.5
0.8

–35.8
20.4
3.4
...
–58.2
–1.5

–37.9
26.9
–1.6
...
–63.3
0.1

–34.3
18.1
–67.7
...
14.0
1.3

4.4
44.5
–43.2
...
–17.1
20.2

–7.6
38.2
–115.3
...
59.0
10.6

–11.7
46.8
15.4
...
–81.0
7.0

–14.0
27.7
–58.4
...
11.2
5.4

–31.1
3.7
–13.5
...
–21.3
0.0

–31.9
26.5
–20.3
...
–38.1
0.0

Other Advanced Economies1
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

308.1
–163.8
153.5
–1.8
105.3
214.8

358.6
39.4
367.7
23.3
–122.9
51.2

315.8
–35.6
308.1
14.1
–2.0
32.3

377.2
70.1
263.0
–16.5
–262.9
324.8

617.4
–49.1
501.8
–11.0
–79.2
256.4

492.7
–14.8
313.1
29.7
362.4
–196.9

490.9
–1.0
416.0
–30.2
165.7
–58.5

586.1
–64.3
581.0
31.3
–38.3
76.9

605.4
–29.4
469.4
1.7
41.7
122.4

622.8
–47.5
471.7
7.3
50.0
141.7

Emerging Market and Developing
Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–278.9
–297.1
–212.3
...
47.0
186.4

–263.4
–366.1
–106.9
...
97.8
113.8

–141.8
–345.1
–75.9
...
103.9
170.1

47.7
–313.8
–10.5
...
253.3
89.7

218.5
–486.9
121.9
...
69.3
520.7

560.4
–247.1
508.8
...
176.1
111.1

198.0
–129.4
207.8
...
–69.9
175.9

380.3
–125.9
264.7
...
141.8
62.8

488.3
–164.9
205.6
...
–115.2
538.3

360.2
–246.0
155.3
...
–77.3
508.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

147

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Emerging and Developing Asia
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–58.8
–108.4
–70.0
2.3
–81.9
199.1

–261.0
–168.2
–100.4
4.7
–18.5
22.0

–51.6
–143.4
–71.6
–2.5
69.5
96.8

157.1
–163.6
–106.8
15.8
243.5
168.5

141.2
–258.6
–20.3
–2.3
147.3
275.8

207.3
–64.2
309.6
18.3
–104.7
49.1

214.9
116.9
39.2
21.2
–37.6
74.9

411.5
92.5
215.3
34.5
126.3
–57.3

604.3
57.8
174.3
24.8
–15.6
361.8

498.9
21.1
132.4
24.8
–43.3
364.2

Emerging and Developing Europe
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–26.7
–28.0
–34.9
–2.2
25.0
13.4

105.2
–26.3
9.9
–3.0
79.0
45.6

58.9
–51.3
–2.8
1.3
19.5
92.2

9.9
–38.6
21.5
0.3
31.2
–4.4

94.0
–40.8
49.2
–4.6
–37.2
127.2

158.3
–40.7
32.2
–5.6
140.7
31.6

–22.5
–31.4
–16.1
5.0
–27.8
47.9

–26.8
–34.6
–25.9
4.8
–4.9
33.7

–52.6
–43.5
–25.2
0.2
–39.3
55.2

–37.9
–60.7
–11.4
0.8
–16.1
49.5

Latin America and the Caribbean
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–111.1
–120.7
–45.7
3.9
33.9
17.3

–166.6
–148.2
–16.5
4.0
–17.0
11.0

–124.5
–114.3
–1.9
4.9
19.3
–32.3

–13.4
–94.4
–9.5
5.7
69.4
15.4

–107.7
–102.9
–16.5
2.0
–41.1
50.8

–147.3
–120.2
12.3
2.3
–24.1
–17.8

–98.2
–132.6
24.2
–7.1
15.7
1.5

–97.4
–119.9
13.1
1.6
–0.6
8.3

–98.7
–114.0
1.2
–1.4
–37.8
52.9

–103.6
–132.7
–6.1
–2.8
–2.2
40.1

Middle East and Central Asia
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–37.4
–4.0
–37.7
...
71.5
–60.0

96.9
–11.0
5.5
...
78.6
30.4

30.2
–8.3
19.1
...
8.2
9.2

–86.0
–9.3
82.3
...
–82.5
–83.1

109.0
–22.0
67.6
...
17.4
46.9

394.3
–4.0
153.4
...
192.4
56.7

167.1
–40.3
161.3
...
–10.6
60.0

116.6
–24.4
72.2
...
1.6
70.7

64.8
–15.3
63.3
...
–45.8
61.9

32.9
–22.1
44.7
...
–34.2
46.3

Sub-Saharan Africa
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–44.9
–35.9
–24.1
0.0
–1.4
16.5

–38.0
–12.4
–5.4
–0.6
–24.4
4.8

–54.6
–27.9
–18.6
0.2
–12.6
4.3

–19.9
–7.8
2.1
0.9
–8.4
–6.7

–18.0
–62.7
41.9
–0.2
–17.1
20.0

–52.2
–18.0
1.3
1.4
–28.2
–8.6

–63.2
–41.9
–0.9
–2.4
–9.6
–8.4

–23.6
–39.5
–10.0
–0.9
19.4
7.3

–29.4
–49.9
–8.0
–1.0
23.3
6.3

–30.1
–51.5
–4.3
–0.8
18.6
7.9

Regional Groups

148

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A13. Summary of Financial Account Balances (continued)
(Billions of US dollars)

Projections
2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Fuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

16.5
23.7
–32.4
...
99.3
–67.1

165.1
17.5
6.1
...
108.0
40.0

63.0
6.1
16.9
...
27.7
10.6

–51.8
6.8
81.7
...
–61.4
–85.7

163.2
–7.4
83.6
...
38.1
49.8

476.6
26.0
118.9
...
258.0
78.1

194.0
–22.3
152.7
...
11.6
55.6

192.1
33.9
76.8
...
25.8
59.5

126.0
11.2
63.3
...
4.2
46.9

102.8
7.3
44.1
...
21.4
31.9

Nonfuel
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves

–295.5
–320.8
–180.0
4.1
–52.2
253.5

–428.6
–383.7
–113.0
5.0
–10.2
73.9

–204.8
–351.2
–92.8
3.9
76.1
159.5

99.5
–320.6
–92.1
22.8
314.7
175.4

55.3
–479.6
38.2
–5.1
31.1
470.9

83.8
–273.1
389.9
16.4
–81.9
32.9

4.0
–107.2
55.1
16.8
–81.5
120.3

188.2
–159.8
187.9
40.1
116.1
3.3

362.3
–176.1
142.3
22.6
–119.4
491.4

257.4
–253.3
111.2
22.1
–98.7
476.2

–330.2
–256.5
–129.1
...
–27.0
78.4

–356.6
–287.8
–38.3
...
–27.2
–3.3

–296.0
–273.3
–35.4
...
–64.7
78.3

–115.8
–233.5
–55.8
...
33.7
131.5

–290.8
–285.0
–18.9
...
–199.5
208.1

–421.9
–292.8
75.6
...
–161.5
–48.0

–281.7
–270.2
–35.5
...
–132.9
149.6

–299.5
–296.9
–44.0
...
–57.5
72.5

–331.9
–275.5
–39.8
11.9
–168.5
138.5

–366.1
–321.6
–37.9
11.3
–156.2
138.3

–57.7
–26.2
–36.9
...
–11.2
17.2

–43.6
–24.6
–21.3
...
–1.6
4.2

–48.2
–32.4
–17.4
...
2.4
–0.9

–28.1
–22.6
3.9
...
11.3
–20.4

–39.5
–33.8
–22.3
...
5.7
10.5

–38.6
–22.3
31.2
...
–25.5
–21.7

–42.4
–35.3
7.8
...
–24.8
9.6

–43.2
–76.5
3.2
...
10.0
20.4

–76.1
–49.6
2.0
...
–53.1
25.1

–74.9
–57.9
1.9
...
–34.9
16.5

119.5

213.9

–15.6

5.0

664.0

442.3

58.9

545.9

412.0

402.8

Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings

By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears
and/or Rescheduling
during 2020–24
Financial Account Balance
Direct Investment, Net
Portfolio Investment, Net
Financial Derivatives, Net
Other Investment, Net
Change in Reserves
Memorandum
World
Financial Account Balance

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar
values for the relevant individual countries. Some group aggregates for the financial derivatives are not shown because of incomplete data. Projections for the euro area are not available
because of data constraints.
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

149

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
Averages

Average

2007–16

2011–18

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027–30

Advanced Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

0.0
0.0
21.6
21.7
0.0

0.5
0.5
22.3
21.7
0.0

0.6
0.7
23.2
22.7
–0.1

0.2
0.2
22.6
22.5
0.0

0.8
0.8
23.5
22.8
0.0

–0.2
–0.4
23.0
23.4
0.2

0.0
0.0
22.0
22.5
0.0

0.1
0.1
21.8
22.2
0.0

–0.1
–0.1
21.9
22.1
0.0

0.1
0.1
22.0
22.0
0.0

0.0
0.1
22.1
22.1
0.0

United States
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–3.0
–2.9
17.2
20.3
0.0

–2.3
–2.2
18.6
20.7
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
19.3
21.7
0.0

–2.8
–2.8
18.2
21.4
0.0

–3.6
–3.6
17.6
21.4
0.0

–3.8
–3.8
18.2
22.0
0.0

–3.4
–3.3
17.0
21.6
0.0

–4.0
–4.0
16.5
21.5
0.0

–4.0
–4.0
17.3
21.4
0.0

–3.6
–3.6
17.6
21.2
0.0

–3.6
–3.6
17.7
21.3
0.0

Euro Area
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

1.0
0.9
22.5
20.9
0.1

2.2
2.2
23.3
20.4
0.0

2.2
2.4
25.4
22.4
–0.2

1.8
1.8
24.4
22.0
0.0

3.1
2.8
26.4
22.8
0.4

0.9
–0.1
24.9
23.9
1.1

2.0
1.7
24.9
22.4
0.3

2.7
2.6
24.8
21.3
0.0

...
2.3
24.7
21.5
...

...
2.2
24.6
21.5
...

...
2.1
24.6
21.7
...

Germany
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

6.8
6.8
26.7
19.9
–0.1

7.5
7.6
27.9
20.3
–0.1

7.7
7.9
29.3
21.4
–0.1

6.0
6.3
28.0
21.7
–0.3

6.8
6.9
29.6
22.7
–0.1

3.3
3.8
27.1
23.3
–0.5

4.9
5.5
27.5
22.0
–0.6

5.1
5.6
27.1
21.5
–0.5

5.4
5.4
26.7
21.3
0.0

5.1
5.1
25.8
20.7
0.0

4.5
4.5
25.6
21.2
0.0

France
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–0.7
–0.7
21.3
22.0
0.0

–0.8
–0.8
21.1
22.0
0.0

0.7
0.6
23.6
23.0
0.1

–2.0
–2.0
20.8
22.8
0.1

0.6
0.3
23.7
23.4
0.4

–1.0
–1.4
22.6
24.0
0.4

–0.8
–1.0
21.9
23.0
0.3

0.3
0.1
21.6
21.5
0.2

0.1
–0.1
21.6
21.7
0.2

0.0
–0.2
21.1
21.3
0.2

0.1
–0.1
20.8
20.9
0.2

Italy
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–0.5
–0.6
18.7
19.3
0.1

1.1
1.1
19.1
18.1
0.1

3.1
3.2
21.5
18.4
0.0

3.8
3.8
21.7
17.9
0.0

2.2
2.1
24.1
22.0
0.1

–1.2
–1.7
22.9
24.6
0.5

0.9
0.1
23.1
22.9
0.8

1.1
1.1
23.5
22.4
0.0

1.0
1.0
23.7
22.7
0.1

1.0
1.0
24.7
23.8
0.1

1.8
1.7
26.1
24.4
0.1

Spain
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–1.5
–1.9
19.9
21.8
0.4

1.8
1.4
20.6
19.2
0.4

2.5
2.1
23.0
20.9
0.3

1.2
0.8
21.4
20.6
0.4

1.6
0.8
22.6
21.9
0.9

1.3
0.4
23.1
22.7
0.9

3.9
2.7
23.9
21.1
1.1

4.3
3.2
24.4
21.2
1.1

3.5
2.7
24.3
21.7
0.9

3.7
2.6
24.4
21.8
1.0

2.4
2.2
23.6
21.5
0.2

Japan
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

2.5
2.6
27.0
24.4
–0.1

2.4
2.4
27.2
24.7
–0.1

3.4
3.4
29.2
25.8
–0.1

2.9
3.0
28.2
25.2
0.0

3.8
3.9
29.7
25.8
–0.1

2.1
2.1
28.9
26.8
0.0

3.6
3.7
29.8
26.1
–0.1

4.8
4.8
30.9
26.1
0.0

3.9
3.9
30.4
26.5
–0.1

3.6
3.6
30.1
26.5
–0.1

3.5
3.5
29.9
26.3
0.0

United Kingdom
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–3.9
–3.8
13.0
16.8
–0.1

–4.2
–4.0
13.2
17.2
–0.1

–2.7
–2.7
15.6
18.2
–0.1

–3.1
–2.9
14.6
17.6
–0.1

–0.5
–0.4
17.2
17.7
–0.1

–2.2
–2.1
16.6
18.7
–0.1

–3.7
–3.5
14.3
17.8
–0.2

–2.8
–2.7
15.0
17.7
–0.2

–3.2
–3.1
13.8
16.9
–0.2

–3.1
–3.0
14.1
17.1
–0.2

–2.6
–2.4
14.6
17.0
–0.1

150

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
Averages

Average

2007–16

2011–18

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027–30

Canada
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–2.4
–2.4
21.5
23.9
0.0

–2.9
–2.9
21.1
24.0
0.0

–2.0
–2.0
21.1
23.0
0.0

–2.0
–2.0
20.7
22.7
0.0

0.0
0.0
24.3
24.3
0.0

–0.3
–0.3
25.0
25.3
0.0

–0.6
–0.6
23.3
23.9
0.0

–0.5
–0.5
22.7
23.2
0.0

–1.4
–1.4
21.8
23.2
0.0

–1.3
–1.3
21.9
23.2
0.0

–0.8
–0.8
22.0
22.8
0.0

Other Advanced Economies1
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

4.2
4.3
30.5
26.0
–0.1

4.5
4.6
30.5
25.8
–0.1

4.4
4.4
30.0
25.5
0.0

5.1
5.0
31.2
25.9
0.1

6.6
6.7
33.3
26.3
–0.2

6.6
6.5
33.1
26.3
0.1

5.7
5.5
31.3
25.6
0.2

6.6
6.5
32.1
25.3
0.1

6.4
6.3
31.2
24.8
0.1

6.2
6.1
30.9
24.8
0.1

6.1
6.0
31.0
25.1
0.1

1.3
1.3
32.4
31.2
0.1

0.5
0.4
32.2
31.9
0.1

0.1
0.1
32.0
32.1
0.1

0.6
0.5
32.6
32.2
0.1

1.0
0.9
34.1
33.3
0.0

1.6
1.6
34.4
32.9
0.0

0.7
0.7
32.7
32.1
0.0

1.0
1.0
32.5
31.6
0.0

1.0
1.0
31.6
30.8
0.0

0.7
0.6
31.7
31.1
0.0

0.5
0.4
32.1
31.8
0.0

Emerging and Developing Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

2.5
2.5
42.6
40.2
0.0

1.0
1.0
41.3
40.3
0.0

0.5
0.4
39.3
38.8
0.0

1.5
1.5
39.9
38.3
0.0

1.2
1.2
40.6
39.4
0.0

1.3
1.3
40.6
39.2
0.0

1.0
1.0
39.0
38.0
0.0

1.6
1.6
39.1
37.6
0.0

2.2
2.2
38.2
36.1
0.0

1.7
1.7
38.0
36.4
0.0

1.2
1.2
38.3
37.0
0.0

Emerging and Developing Europe
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–0.5
–0.6
23.9
24.4
0.2

0.2
–0.1
24.7
24.6
0.3

1.8
1.4
25.0
23.5
0.4

0.6
0.1
24.6
24.5
0.5

2.0
1.6
26.9
25.3
0.4

2.8
2.6
29.1
26.3
0.1

–0.1
–0.4
26.4
26.5
0.3

0.2
–0.1
25.3
25.3
0.3

–0.8
–1.1
24.8
25.9
0.3

–0.6
–1.0
25.2
26.2
0.5

–0.5
–0.7
25.8
26.5
0.3

Latin America and the Caribbean
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–2.0
–2.0
19.6
21.7
0.1

–2.6
–2.6
18.2
20.8
0.0

–2.1
–2.1
16.8
18.9
0.0

–0.1
–0.2
17.7
18.0
0.1

–1.9
–1.8
18.7
20.6
–0.1

–2.3
–2.2
18.1
20.4
–0.1

–1.3
–1.2
18.3
19.5
–0.1

–1.1
–0.9
18.6
19.5
–0.2

–1.3
–1.1
18.0
19.2
–0.2

–1.3
–1.1
18.2
19.4
–0.2

–1.3
–1.2
18.6
19.9
–0.2

Middle East and Central Asia
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

5.9
5.9
34.2
28.2
0.1

4.0
3.9
31.2
27.0
0.0

0.7
0.9
27.4
26.6
–0.1

–3.0
–3.0
22.7
25.6
–0.1

2.9
3.1
28.6
25.8
–0.1

7.8
8.0
33.4
26.1
–0.1

3.7
4.0
30.8
27.6
–0.2

2.3
2.3
28.8
27.1
–0.2

1.2
1.1
27.9
27.3
0.0

0.6
0.6
27.5
27.6
0.0

0.4
0.4
27.4
28.1
0.0

Sub-Saharan Africa
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

–1.0
–1.6
17.8
19.3
0.6

–1.9
–2.3
17.3
19.4
0.4

–2.2
–2.5
19.2
21.8
0.4

–2.0
–2.4
19.0
21.4
0.4

–0.4
–0.7
20.4
21.0
0.4

–1.7
–2.0
19.7
21.5
0.3

–2.0
–2.4
18.5
20.8
0.4

–1.0
–1.5
19.2
20.5
0.5

–1.3
–1.7
19.2
21.0
0.4

–1.4
–1.8
19.8
21.7
0.4

–1.4
–1.8
20.0
21.8
0.4

Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Regional Groups

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

151

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Table A14. Summary of Net Lending and Borrowing (continued)
(Percent of GDP)

Projections
Averages

Average

2007–16

2011–18

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027–30

Fuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

7.1
7.2
33.9
26.6
0.1

5.1
5.1
31.2
25.6
–0.1

2.0
2.2
28.9
26.6
–0.2

–2.7
–2.6
24.2
26.7
–0.2

4.6
5.0
31.2
26.6
–0.2

10.3
10.6
36.3
26.2
–0.2

5.4
5.7
33.2
28.2
–0.2

4.6
4.7
32.6
28.5
–0.2

2.9
3.0
31.2
29.0
–0.1

2.3
2.3
30.7
29.2
–0.1

2.2
2.2
30.2
29.4
–0.1

Nonfuel
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

0.3
0.2
32.1
31.9
0.1

–0.3
–0.4
32.3
32.7
0.1

–0.1
–0.2
32.4
32.6
0.1

0.9
0.8
33.5
32.7
0.1

0.6
0.5
34.4
34.0
0.1

0.5
0.5
34.1
33.7
0.0

0.2
0.1
32.6
32.5
0.0

0.6
0.6
32.4
31.9
0.0

0.8
0.8
31.7
30.9
0.0

0.5
0.5
31.8
31.3
0.1

0.3
0.3
32.2
32.0
0.0

–2.3
–2.6
23.0
25.6
0.3

–2.5
–2.7
22.5
25.2
0.2

–1.8
–2.0
22.6
24.6
0.2

–0.7
–0.9
23.0
23.9
0.3

–1.8
–1.9
23.7
25.7
0.2

–2.6
–2.7
23.5
26.2
0.1

–1.4
–1.5
23.7
25.1
0.1

–1.4
–1.5
23.5
25.0
0.1

–1.6
–1.8
23.1
24.9
0.1

–1.7
–1.9
23.3
25.2
0.1

–1.7
–1.8
23.8
25.6
0.1

–3.2
–4.0
20.6
24.9
0.8

–3.9
–4.5
19.4
24.1
0.5

–3.0
–3.5
19.3
23.5
0.4

–1.8
–2.3
18.3
21.1
0.5

–2.0
–2.4
19.1
21.8
0.4

–2.0
–2.4
19.1
21.7
0.4

–2.4
–2.9
17.2
20.4
0.4

–2.5
–3.3
15.9
19.5
0.8

–4.2
–4.6
14.9
19.9
0.4

–3.8
–4.3
16.1
20.6
0.4

–2.6
–3.0
17.8
21.0
0.4

0.4
0.4
25.5
25.1
0.0

0.5
0.4
26.2
25.7
0.0

0.4
0.4
26.8
26.4
0.0

0.4
0.3
26.6
26.3
0.0

0.9
0.8
27.9
27.1
0.0

0.5
0.4
27.8
27.4
0.1

0.3
0.3
26.4
26.5
0.0

0.5
0.4
26.2
26.1
0.0

0.4
0.4
25.9
25.6
0.0

0.3
0.3
26.0
25.7
0.0

0.2
0.2
26.4
26.2
0.0

Analytical Groups
By Source of Export Earnings

By External Financing Source
Net Debtor Economies
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Net Debtor Economies by
Debt-Servicing Experience
Economies with Arrears and/or
Rescheduling during 2020–24
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance
Memorandum
World
Net Lending and Borrowing
Current Account Balance
Savings
Investment
Capital Account Balance

Note: The estimates in this table are based on individual countries’ national accounts and balance of payments statistics. Country group composites are calculated as the sum of the US dollar
values for the relevant individual countries. This differs from the calculations in the April 2005 and earlier issues of the World Economic Outlook, in which the composites were weighted
by GDP valued at purchasing power parities as a share of total world GDP. The estimates of gross national savings and investment (or gross capital formation) are from individual countries’
national accounts statistics. The estimates of the current account balance, the capital account balance, and the financial account balance (or net lending/net borrowing) are from the balance of
payments statistics. The link between domestic transactions and transactions with the rest of the world can be expressed as accounting identities. Savings (S) minus investment (I) is equal to
the current account balance (CAB) (S – I = CAB). Also, net lending/net borrowing (NLB) is the sum of the current account balance and the capital account balance (KAB) (NLB = CAB + KAB). In
practice, these identities do not hold exactly; imbalances result from imperfections in source data and compilation as well as from asymmetries in group composition due to data availability.
1 Excludes the Group of Seven (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, United States) and euro area countries.

152

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

STATISTICAL APPENDIX

Table A15. Summary of World Medium-Term Baseline Scenario
Projections
Averages
2007–16

Averages

2017–26

2023

2024

2025

2026

2023–26

2027–30

3.2
1.6
4.2

3.1
1.6
4.0

3.3
1.7
4.3

3.2
1.6
4.1

Annual Percent Change
World Real GDP
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Memorandum
Potential Output
Major Advanced Economies

3.4
1.3
5.3

3.1
1.8
4.0

3.5
1.7
4.7

3.3
1.8
4.3

1.4

1.6

1.9

1.8

1.7

1.6

1.7

1.5

3.4

2.8

1.0

3.5

3.6

2.3

2.6

3.1

2.5
5.5

2.4
3.4

–0.7
3.7

2.1
5.6

3.1
4.3

1.3
4.0

1.4
4.4

2.3
4.4

3.0
4.1

2.2
3.8

0.9
1.4

1.8
6.5

2.1
5.9

1.7
3.3

1.6
4.3

2.5
4.0

0.2
0.1

0.1
0.0

0.4
–0.9

0.9
0.0

0.4
–1.2

–0.5
–0.3

0.3
–0.6

–0.1
0.0

World Prices in US Dollars
Manufactures
Oil
Nonfuel Primary Commodities

0.4
–3.9
1.4

1.6
4.3
5.6

–1.7
–16.4
–5.7

1.3
–1.8
3.7

0.6
–12.9
7.4

–0.1
–4.5
4.1

0.0
–9.1
2.3

0.6
0.5
0.2

Consumer Prices
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

1.6
5.9

2.8
6.1

4.6
8.2

2.6
7.9

2.5
5.3

2.2
4.7

3.0
6.5

2.1
4.0

Interest Rates
World Real Long-Term Interest Rate2

1.0

–0.6

Percent
–1.3
0.8

1.2

1.4

0.5

1.5

–0.1
1.0

0.1
0.6

0.0
0.8

0.1
0.4

World Trade, Volume1
Imports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Exports
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies
Terms of Trade
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

Current Account Balances
Advanced Economies
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

0.0
1.3

0.3
0.6

Percent of GDP
0.0
0.1
0.7
1.0

Total External Debt
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

27.3

29.3

28.8

28.1

27.9

27.6

28.1

26.4

Debt Service
Emerging Market and Developing Economies

9.6

9.9

9.9

9.8

9.2

9.1

9.5

8.7

1 Data refer to trade in goods and services.

2 GDP-weighted average of 10-year (or nearest-maturity) government bond rates for Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the
United States.

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

153

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
SELECTED TOPICS

World Economic Outlook Archives
World Economic Outlook: Uneven Growth—Short- and Long-Term Factors

April 2015

World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices

October 2015

World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long

April 2016

World Economic Outlook: Subdued Demand—Symptoms and Remedies

October 2016

World Economic Outlook: Gaining Momentum?

April 2017

World Economic Outlook: Seeking Sustainable Growth: Short-Term Recovery,
Long-Term Challenges

October 2017

World Economic Outlook: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change

April 2018

World Economic Outlook: Challenges to Steady Growth

October 2018

World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery

April 2019

World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers

October 2019

World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown

April 2020

World Economic Outlook: A Long and Difficult Ascent

October 2020

World Economic Outlook: Managing Divergent Recoveries

April 2021

World Economic Outlook: Uncharted Territory: Recovery during a Pandemic

October 2021

World Economic Outlook: War Sets Back the Global Recovery

April 2022

World Economic Outlook: Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis

October 2022

World Economic Outlook: A Rocky Recovery

April 2023

World Economic Outlook: Growing Global Divergences

October 2023

World Economic Outlook: Steady but Slow: Resilience amid Divergence

April 2024

World Economic Outlook: Policy Pivot, Rising Threats

October 2024

World Economic Outlook: A Critical Juncture amid Policy Shifts

April 2025

World Economic Outlook: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

October 2025

I. Methodology—Aggregation, Modeling, and Forecasting
Tariff Scenarios

October 2016, Scenario Box

World Growth Projections over the Medium Term

October 2016, Box 1.1

Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and
Commodity Prices

April 2019, Box 1.2

On the Underlying Source of Changes in Capital Goods Prices:
A Model-Based Analysis

April 2019, Box 3.3

Global Growth Forecast: Assumptions on Policies, Financial Conditions, and
Commodity Prices

October 2019, Box 1.3

Alternative Evolutions in the Fight against COVID-19

April 2020, Scenario Box

Alternative Scenarios

October 2020, Scenario Box

Revised World Economic Outlook Purchasing-Power-Parity Weights

October 2020, Box 1.1

Scenario Box

April 2021

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

155

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Downside Scenarios

October 2021, Scenario Box

Scenario Box

April 2022, Scenario Box

Risk Assessment around the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection

October 2022, Box 1.3

Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook Baseline Projection

April 2023, Box 1.3

Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection

October 2023, Box 1.2

Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection

April 2024, Box 1.2

Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection

October 2024, Box 1.2

Risk Assessment Surrounding the World Economic Outlook’s Baseline Projection

April 2025, Box 1.1

Risk Assessment Surrounding the Baseline Projection

October 2025, Box 1.2

Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
October 2025, Commodity
		 Special Feature

II. Historical Surveys
What Is the Effect of Recessions?

October 2015, Box 1.1

Commodity Market Fragmentation in History: Many Shades of Gray

October 2023, Box 3.2

III. Economic Growth—Sources and Patterns
The Origins of IMF Growth Forecast Revisions since 2011

October 2014, Box 1.2

Underlying Drivers of U.S. Yields Matter for Spillovers
October 2014, Chapter 2,
		 Spillover Feature
Is It Time for an Infrastructure Push? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment

October 2014, Chapter 3

The Macroeconomic Effects of Scaling Up Public Investment in Developing Economies

October 2014, Box 3.4

Where Are We Headed? Perspectives on Potential Output

April 2015, Chapter 3

Steady as She Goes—Estimating Sustainable Output

April 2015, Box 3.1

Macroeconomic Developments and Outlook in Low-Income Developing Countries—
The Role of External Factors

April 2016, Box 1.2

Time for a Supply-Side Boost? Macroeconomic Effects of Labor and Product Market
Reforms in Advanced Economies

April 2016, Chapter 3

Road Less Traveled: Growth in Emerging Market and Developing Economies in a
Complicated External Environment

April 2017, Chapter 3

Growing with Flows: Evidence from Industry-Level Data

April 2017, Box 2.2

Emerging Market and Developing Economy Growth: Heterogeneity and Income Convergence
over the Forecast Horizon

October 2017, Box 1.3

Manufacturing Jobs: Implications for Productivity and Inequality

April 2018, Chapter 3

Is Productivity Growth Shared in a Globalized Economy?

April 2018, Chapter 4

Recent Dynamics of Potential Growth

April 2018, Box 1.3

Growth Outlook: Advanced Economies

October 2018, Box 1.2

Growth Outlook: Emerging Market and Developing Economies

October 2018, Box 1.3

The Global Recovery 10 Years after the 2008 Financial Meltdown

October 2018, Chapter 2

The Plucking Theory of the Business Cycle

October 2019, Box 1.4

Reigniting Growth in Low-Income and Emerging Market Economies: What Role Can
Structural Reforms Play?

October 2019, Chapter 3

Countering Future Recessions in Advanced Economies: Cyclical Policies in an
Era of Low Rates and High Debt

April 2020, Chapter 2

The Great Lockdown: Dissecting the Economic Effects

October 2020, Chapter 2

An Overview of the Literature on the Economic Impact of Lockdowns

October 2020, Box 2.1

156

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

SELECTED TOPICS

Global Manufacturing: V-Shaped Recovery and Implications for the Global Outlook

April 2021, Box 1.1

After-Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Prospects for Medium-Term Economic Damage

April 2021, Chapter 2

A Perfect Storm Hits the Hotel and Restaurant Sector

April 2021, Box 2.1

Research and Innovation: Fighting the Pandemic and Boosting Long-Term Growth

October 2021, Chapter 3

Dimming Growth Prospects: A Longer Path to Convergence

October 2023, Box 1.1

The Uneven Economic Effects of Commodity Market Fragmentation

October 2023, Box 3.3

Slowdown in Global Medium-Term Growth: What Will It Take to Turn the Tide?

April 2024, Chapter 3

Allocative Efficiency: Concept, Examples, and Measurement

April 2024, Box 3.1

The Potential Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Global Productivity and
Labor Markets

April 2024, Box 3.3

The Rise of the Silver Economy: Global Implications of Population Aging

April 2025, Chapter 2

IV. Inflation and Deflation and Commodity Markets
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Investment
April 2015, Chapter 1,
in an Era of Low Oil Prices		 Special Feature
The Oil Price Collapse: Demand or Supply?

April 2015, Box 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Metals in the
October 2015, Chapter 1,
World Economy		 Special Feature
The New Frontiers of Metal Extraction: The North-to-South Shift
October 2015, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath
of the Commodity Boom

October 2015, Chapter 2

The Not-So-Sick Patient: Commodity Booms and the Dutch Disease Phenomenon

October 2015, Box 2.1

Do Commodity Exporters’ Economies Overheat during Commodity Booms?

October 2015, Box 2.4

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the
April 2016, Chapter 1,
Energy Transition in an Era of Low Fossil Fuel Prices		 Special Feature
Global Disinflation in an Era of Constrained Monetary Policy

October 2016, Chapter 3

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Food Security and
October 2016, Chapter 1,
Markets in the World Economy		 Special Feature
How Much Do Global Prices Matter for Food Inflation?

October 2016, Box 3.3

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on the Role of Technology and
April 2017, Chapter 1,
Unconventional Sources in the Global Oil Market		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2017, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
April 2018, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
What Has Held Core Inflation Back in Advanced Economies?

April 2018, Box 1.2

The Role of Metals in the Economics of Electric Vehicles

April 2018, Box 1.SF.1

Inflation Outlook: Regions and Countries

October 2018, Box 1.4

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts, with a Focus on Recent Trends in
October 2018, Chapter 1,
Energy Demand		 Special Feature
The Demand and Supply of Renewable Energy

October 2018, Box 1.SF.1

Challenges for Monetary Policy in Emerging Markets as Global Financial Conditions Normalize

October 2018, Chapter 3

Inflation Dynamics in a Wider Group of Emerging Market and Developing Economies

October 2018, Box 3.1

Commodity Special Feature
April 2019, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2019, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

157

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
April 2020, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2020, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
What Is Happening with Global Carbon Emissions in 2019?
October 2020, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature Box 1.SF.1
Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
April 2021, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
House Prices and Consumer Price Inflation

October 2021, Box 1.1

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2021, Chapter 1,
		 Special Feature
Inflation Scares

October 2021, Chapter 2

Core Inflation in the COVID-19 Crisis

October 2021, Box 2.2

Market Developments and the Pace of Fossil Fuel Divestment

April 2022, Special Feature

Dissecting Recent WEO Inflation Forecast Errors

October 2022, Box 1.1

Market Power and Inflation during COVID-19

October 2022, Box 1.2

Commodity Market Developments and Food Inflation Drivers
October 2022,
		 Special Feature
Commodity Market Developments and the Macroeconomic Impact of Declines in
April 2023, Chapter 1,
Fossil Fuel Extraction		 Special Feature
Commodity Prices and Monetary Policy: High Frequency Analysis
October 2023, Commodity
		 Special Feature
		 Online Annex 1.1
Firms’ Inflation Expectations, Attention, and Monetary Policy Effectiveness

October 2023, Box 2.1

Energy Subsidies, Inflation, and Expectations: Unpacking Euro Area Measures

October 2023, Box 2.3

Fragmentation and Commodity Markets: Vulnerabilities and Risks

October 2023, Chapter 3

Commodity Trade Tensions: Evidence from Tanker Traffic Data

October 2023, Box 3.1

Market Developments and the Inflationary Effects of Metals Supply Shocks
October 2024, Commodity
		 Special Feature
The Great Tightening: Insights from the Recent Inflation Episode

October 2024, Chapter 2

Market Developments and the Impact of AI on Energy Demand
April 2025, Commodity
		 Special Feature
Immigration and Inflation

April 2025, Box 3.4

Market Developments and Commodity-Driven Macroeconomic Fluctuations
October 2025, Commodity
		 Special Feature

V. Fiscal Policy
Commodity Booms and Public Investment

October 2015, Box 2.2

Cross-Border Impacts of Fiscal Policy: Still Relevant

October 2017, Chapter 4

The Spillover Impact of U.S. Government Spending Shocks on External Positions

October 2017, Box 4.1

Macroeconomic Impact of Corporate Tax Policy Changes

April 2018, Box 1.5

Place-Based Policies: Rethinking Fiscal Policies to Tackle Inequalities within Countries

October 2019, Box 2.4

Coming Down to Earth: How to Tackle Soaring Public Debt

April 2023, Chapter 3

Market Reforms to Promote Growth and Debt Sustainability

April 2023, Box 3.1

Fiscal Imprudence and Inflation Expectations: The Role of Monetary Policy Frameworks

October 2023, Box 2.1

Industrial Policies in Emerging Markets: Old and New

April 2024, Box 4.1

The Role of Price-Suppressing Policies

October 2024, Box 2.2

The Impact of Immigration on Government Finances

April 2025, Box 3.3

158

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

SELECTED TOPICS

VI. Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and Flow of Funds
U.S. Monetary Policy and Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Box 2.2

A Transparent Risk-Management Approach to Monetary Policy

October 2016, Box 3.5

Will the Revival in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets Be Sustained?

October 2017, Box 1.2

The Role of Financial Sector Repair in the Speed of the Recovery

October 2018, Box 2.3

Clarity of Central Bank Communications and the Extent of Anchoring of Inflation Expectations

October 2018, Box 3.2

Can Negative Policy Rates Stimulate the Economy?

April 2020, Box 2.1

Dampening Global Financial Shocks in Emerging Markets: Can Macroprudential Regulation Help?

April 2020, Chapter 3

Macroprudential Policies and Credit: A Meta-Analysis of the Empirical Findings

April 2020, Box 3.1

Do Emerging Markets Adjust Macroprudential Regulation in Response to Global Financial Shocks?

April 2020, Box 3.2

Rising Small and Medium-Sized Enterprise Bankruptcy and Insolvency Risks:
Assessment and Policy Options

April 2020, Box 1.3

Shifting Gears: Monetary Policy Spillovers during the Recovery from COVID-19

April 2021, Chapter 4

Emerging Market Asset Purchase Programs: Rationale and Effectiveness

April 2021, Box 4.1

Monetary Expansions and Inflationary Risks

October 2021, Box 1.3

Policy Responses and Expectations in Inflation Acceleration Episodes

October 2021, Box 2.3

Determinants of Neutral Interest Rates and Uncertain Prospects

April 2022, Box 1.2

Private Sector Debt and the Global Recovery

April 2022, Chapter 2

Rising Household Indebtedness, the Global Saving Glut of the Rich, and the Natural Interest Rate

April 2022, Box 2.2

House Prices: Coming Off the Boil

April 2023, Box 1.1

Monetary Policy: Speed of Transmission, Heterogeneity, and Asymmetries

April 2023, Box 1.2

The Natural Rate of Interest: Drivers and Implications for Policy

April 2023, Chapter 2

Spillovers to Emerging Market and Developing Economies

April 2023, Box 2.3

Monetary and Fiscal Interactions

April 2023, Box 3.2

Managing Expectations: Inflation and Monetary Policy

October 2023, Chapter 2

Feeling the Pinch? Tracing the Effects of Monetary Policy through Housing Markets

April 2024, Chapter 2

Weakening Interest Rate Pass-Through in Europe

April 2024, Box 2.1

The Great Tightening: Insights from the Recent Inflation Episode

October 2024, Chapter 2

The Role of Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies

October 2024, Box 2.1

Emerging Market Resilience: Good Luck or Good Policies?

October 2025, Chapter 2

IMF Arrangements and Emerging Market Resilience

October 2025, Box 2.1

Milestones in Developing Monetary Policy Frameworks

October 2025, Box 2.2

Macroeconomic Effects of Undermining Central Bank Independence

October 2025, Box 2.3

VII. Labor Markets, Poverty, and Inequality
Reforming Collective-Bargaining Systems to Achieve High and Stable Employment

April 2016, Box 3.2

Understanding the Downward Trend in Labor Shares

April 2017, Chapter 3

Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

October 2017, Box 1.1

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

October 2017, Chapter 2

Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level

October 2017, Box 2.1

Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.2

Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.3

Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects

April 2018, Chapter 2

Youth Labor Force Participation in Emerging Market and Developing Economies versus
Advanced Economies

April 2018, Box 2.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

159

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Storm Clouds Ahead? Migration and Labor Force Participation Rates

April 2018, Box 2.4

Are Manufacturing Jobs Better Paid? Worker-Level Evidence from Brazil

April 2018, Box 3.3

The Global Financial Crisis, Migration, and Fertility

October 2018, Box 2.1

The Employment Impact of Automation Following the Global Financial Crisis:
The Case of Industrial Robots

October 2018, Box 2.2

Labor Market Dynamics in Select Advanced Economies

April 2019, Box 1.1

Worlds Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities

April 2019, Box 1.3

Closer Together or Further Apart? Within-Country Regional Disparities and Adjustment in
Advanced Economies

October 2019, Chapter 2

Climate Change and Subnational Regional Disparities

October 2019, Box 2.2

The Macroeconomic Effects of Global Migration

April 2020, Chapter 4

Immigration: Labor Market Effects and the Role of Automation

April 2020, Box 4.1

Inclusiveness in Emerging Market and Developing Economies and the Impact of COVID-19

October 2020, Box 1.2

Recessions and Recoveries in Labor Markets: Patterns, Policies, and Responses to the
COVID-19 Shock

April 2021, Chapter 3

Jobs and the Green Economy

October 2021, Box 1.2

The Puzzle of Tight Labor Markets: US and UK Examples

April 2022, Box 1.1

Inequality and Public Debt Sustainability

April 2022, Box 2.1

A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation

April 2022, Chapter 3

The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States

April 2022, Box 3.1

A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?

April 2022, Box 3.2

Wage Dynamics Post–COVID-19 and Wage Price Spiral Risks

October 2022, Chapter 2

Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States

October 2022, Box 2.1

Distributional Implications of Medium-Term Growth Prospects

April 2024, Box 3.2

Understanding the Social Acceptability of Structural Reforms

October 2024, Chapter 3

Policies to Facilitate the Integration of Ukrainian Refugees into the European Labor Market:
Early Evidence

October 2024, Box 3.1

The Rise of the Silver Economy: Global Implications of Population Aging

April 2025, Chapter 2

The Impact of AI on Older Workers

April 2025, Box 2.3

VIII. Exchange Rate Issues
Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected?

October 2015, Chapter 3

The Relationship between Exchange Rates and Global-Value-Chain-Related Trade

October 2015, Box 3.1

Measuring Real Effective Exchange Rates and Competitiveness: The Role of Global Value Chains

October 2015, Box 3.2

Labor Force Participation Rates in Advanced Economies

October 2017, Box 1.1

Recent Wage Dynamics in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Implications

October 2017, Chapter 2

Labor Market Dynamics by Skill Level

October 2017, Box 2.1

Worker Contracts and Nominal Wage Rigidities in Europe: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.2

Wage and Employment Adjustment after the Global Financial Crisis: Firm-Level Evidence

October 2017, Box 2.3

IX. External Payments, Trade, Capital Movements, and Foreign Debt
Understanding the Role of Cyclical and Structural Factors in the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2015, Box 1.2

Small Economies, Large Current Account Deficits

October 2015, Box 1.2

Capital Flows and Financial Deepening in Developing Economies

October 2015, Box 1.3

160

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

SELECTED TOPICS

Dissecting the Global Trade Slowdown

April 2016, Box 1.1

Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets

April 2016, Chapter 2

Capital Flows to Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2016, Box 2.1

The Potential Productivity Gains from Further Trade and Foreign Direct Investment Liberalization

April 2016, Box 3.3

Global Trade: What’s behind the Slowdown?

October 2016, Chapter 2

The Evolution of Emerging Market and Developing Economies’ Trade Integration with
China’s Final Demand

April 2017, Box 2.3

Shifts in the Global Allocation of Capital: Implications for Emerging Market and
Developing Economies

April 2017, Box 2.4

Macroeconomic Adjustment in Emerging Market Commodity Exporters

October 2017, Box 1.4

Remittances and Consumption Smoothing

October 2017, Box 1.5

A Multidimensional Approach to Trade Policy Indicators

April 2018, Box 1.6

The Rise of Services Trade

April 2018, Box 3.2

Role of Foreign Aid in Improving Productivity in Low-Income Developing Countries

April 2018, Box 4.3

Global Trade Tensions

October 2018, Scenario Box

The Price of Capital Goods: A Driver of Investment under Threat?

April 2019, Chapter 3

Evidence from Big Data: Capital Goods Prices across Countries

April 2019, Box 3.2

Capital Goods Tariffs and Investment: Firm-Level Evidence from Colombia

April 2019, Box 3.4

The Drivers of Bilateral Trade and the Spillovers from Tariffs

April 2019, Chapter 4

Gross versus Value-Added Trade

April 2019, Box 4.1

Bilateral and Aggregate Trade Balances

April 2019, Box 4.2

Understanding Trade Deficit Adjustments: Does Bilateral Trade Play a Special Role?

April 2019, Box 4.3

The Global Macro and Micro Effects of a U.S.–China Trade Dispute: Insights from Three Models

April 2019, Box 4.4

A No-Deal Brexit

April 2019, Scenario Box

Implications of Advanced Economies Reshoring Some Production
October 2019,
		 Scenario Box 1.1
Trade Tensions: Updated Scenario
October 2019,
		 Scenario Box 1.2
The Decline in World Foreign Direct Investment in 2018

October 2019, Box 1.2

Global Trade and Value Chains during the Pandemic

April 2022, Chapter 4

Effects of Global Supply Disruptions during the Pandemic

April 2022, Box 4.1

The Impact of Lockdowns on Trade: Evidence from Shipping Data

April 2022, Box 4.2

Firm-Level Trade Adjustment to the COVID-19 Pandemic in France

April 2022, Box 4.3

Geoeconomic Fragmentation and the Natural Interest Rate

April 2023, Box 2.2

Geoeconomic Fragmentation and Foreign Direct Investment

April 2023, Chapter 4

Rising Trade Tensions

April 2023, Box 4.1

Balance Sheet Exposure to Fragmentation Risk

April 2023, Box 4.2

Geopolitical Tensions, Supply Chains, and Trade

April 2023, Box 4.3

Fragmentation Is Already Affecting International Trade

April 2024, Box 1.1

Trading Places: Real Spillovers from G20 Emerging Markets

April 2024, Chapter 4

Capital Flows to G20 Emerging Markets and the Allocation Puzzle

April 2024, Box 4.2

The Global Automotive Industry and the Shift to Electric Vehicles

October 2024, Box 1.1

The Global Effects of Recent Trade Policy Actions: Insights from Multiple Models

April 2025, Box 1.2

Enhancing Global Financial Integration to Support Growth in Low-Income Countries

April 2025, Box 2.1

Trade Reallocation in Response to Tariffs: Will This Time Be Different?

October 2025, Box 1.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

161

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

X. Regional Issues
Still Attached? Labor Force Participation Trends in European Regions

April 2018, Box 2.3

Support or Distort: Evaluating National State Aid in Europe

October 2025, Box 3.2

XI. Country-Specific Analyses
Public Investment in Japan during the Lost Decade

October 2014, Box 3.1

Japanese Exports: What’s the Holdup?

October 2015, Box 3.3

The Japanese Experience with Deflation

October 2016, Box 3.2

Permanently Displaced? Labor Force Participation in U.S. States and Metropolitan Areas

April 2018, Box 2.2

Immigration and Wages in Germany

April 2020, Box 4.2

The Impact of Migration from Venezuela on Latin America and the Caribbean

April 2020, Box 4.3

Pass-Through from Wages to Prices: Estimates from the United States

October 2022, Box 2.1

Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay

October 2022, Box 3.2

China’s Monetary Policy and the Housing Market

April 2024, Box 2.2

Industrial Policy in China: Quantification and Impact on Misallocation

October 2025, Box 3.1

XII. Climate Change Issues
The Effects of Weather Shocks on Economic Activity: How Can Low-Income Countries Cope?

October 2017, Chapter 3

The Growth Impact of Tropical Cyclones

October 2017, Box 3.1

The Role of Policies in Coping with Weather Shocks: A Model-Based Analysis

October 2017, Box 3.2

Strategies for Coping with Weather Shocks and Climate Change: Selected Case Studies

October 2017, Box 3.3

Coping with Weather Shocks: The Role of Financial Markets

October 2017, Box 3.4

Historical Climate, Economic Development, and the World Income Distribution

October 2017, Box 3.5

Mitigating Climate Change

October 2017, Box 3.6

The Price of Manufactured Low-Carbon Energy Technologies

April 2019, Box 3.1

What’s Happening with Global Carbon Emissions?

October 2019, Box 1.SF.1

Mitigating Climate Change—Growth and Distribution-Friendly Strategies

October 2020, Chapter 3

Glossary

October 2020, Box 3.1

Zooming in on the Electricity Sector: The First Step toward Decarbonization

October 2020, Box 3.2

Who Suffers Most from Climate Change? The Case of Natural Disasters

April 2021, Box 1.2

Jobs and the Green Economy

October 2021, Box 1.2

Clean Tech and the Role of Basic Scientific Research

October 2021, Box 3.2

Commodity Market Developments and Forecasts
October 2021, Chapter 1
		 Special Feature
A Greener Labor Market: Employment, Policies, and Economic Transformation

April 2022, Chapter 3

The Geography of Green- and Pollution-Intensive Jobs: Evidence from the United States

April 2022, Box 3.1

A Greener Post-COVID Job Market?

April 2022, Box 3.2

Near-Term Macroeconomic Impact of Decarbonization Policies

October 2022, Chapter 3

Near-Term Implications of Carbon Pricing: A Review of the Literature

October 2022, Box 3.1

Political Economy of Carbon Pricing: Experiences from South Africa, Sweden, and Uruguay

October 2022, Box 3.2

Decarbonizing the Power Sector While Managing Renewables’ Intermittence

October 2022, Box 3.3

The Natural Rate of Interest and the Green Transition

April 2023, Box 2.1

The Global Automotive Industry and the Shift to Electric Vehicles

October 2024, Box 1.1

162

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

SELECTED TOPICS

XIII. Special Topics
Getting By with a Little Help from a Boom: Do Commodity Windfalls Speed Up
Human Development?

October 2015, Box 2.3

Breaking the Deadlock: Identifying the Political Economy Drivers of Structural Reforms

April 2016, Box 3.1

Can Reform Waves Turn the Tide? Some Case Studies Using the Synthetic Control Method

April 2016, Box 3.4

A Global Rush for Land

October 2016, Box 1.SF.1

Conflict, Growth, and Migration

April 2017, Box 1.1

Tackling Measurement Challenges of Irish Economic Activity

April 2017, Box 1.2

Within-Country Trends in Income per Capita: The Cases of Brazil, Russia, India,
China, and South Africa

April 2017, Box 2.1

Technological Progress and Labor Shares: A Historical Overview

April 2017, Box 3.1

The Elasticity of Substitution between Capital and Labor: Concept and Estimation

April 2017, Box 3.2

Routine Tasks, Automation, and Economic Dislocation around the World

April 2017, Box 3.3

Adjustments to the Labor Share of Income

April 2017, Box 3.4

Smartphones and Global Trade

April 2018, Box 1.1

Has Mismeasurement of the Digital Economy Affected Productivity Statistics?

April 2018, Box 1.4

The Changing Service Content of Manufactures

April 2018, Box 3.1

Patent Data and Concepts

April 2018, Box 4.1

International Technology Sourcing and Knowledge Spillovers

April 2018, Box 4.2

Relationship between Competition, Concentration, and Innovation

April 2018, Box 4.4

Increasing Market Power

October 2018, Box 1.1

Sharp GDP Declines: Some Stylized Facts

October 2018, Box 1.5

Predicting Recessions and Slowdowns: A Daunting Task

October 2018, Box 1.6

The Rise of Corporate Market Power and Its Macroeconomic Effects

April 2019, Chapter 2

The Comovement between Industry Concentration and Corporate Saving

April 2019, Box 2.1

Effects of Mergers and Acquisitions on Market Power

April 2019, Box 2.2

The Global Automobile Industry: Recent Developments, and Implications for the Global Outlook

October 2019, Box 1.1

Measuring Subnational Regional Economic Activity and Welfare

October 2019, Box 2.1

The Persistent Effects of Local Shocks: The Case of Automotive Manufacturing Plant Closures

October 2019, Box 2.3

The Political Effects of Structural Reforms

October 2019, Box 3.1

The Impact of Crises on Structural Reforms

October 2019, Box 3.2

The Persistence and Drivers of the Common Component of Interest Rate–Growth Differentials in
Advanced Economies

April 2020, Box 2.2

Social Unrest during COVID-19

October 2020, Box 1.4

The Role of Information Technology Adoption during the Pandemic: Evidence from the
United States

October 2020, Box 2.2

Education Losses during the Pandemic and the Role of Infrastructure

April 2021, Box 2.2

Food Insecurity and the Business Cycle
April 2021, Chapter 1,
		 Annex 1.SF.1
Food Insecurity and Prices during COVID-19

October 2021, Box 2.1

mRNA Vaccines and the Role of Basic Scientific Research

October 2021, Box 3.1

Intellectual Property, Competition, and Innovation

October 2021, Box 3.3

The Role of Price-Suppressing Policies

October 2024, Box 2.2

Understanding the Social Acceptability of Structural Reforms

October 2024, Chapter 3

Policies to Facilitate the Integration of Ukrainian Refugees into the European Labor Market:
Early Evidence

October 2024, Box 3.1

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

163

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

Intergenerational Considerations in Pension Reforms

April 2025, Box 2.2

Journeys and Junctions: Spillovers from Migration and Refugee Policies

April 2025, Chapter 3

Natural Disasters, Conflict, and Forced Displacement

April 2025, Box 3.1

The Demographic Dividends from Migration

April 2025, Box 3.2

Industrial Policy: Managing Trade-Offs to Promote Growth and Resilience

October 2025, Chapter 3

A Comparison between Industrial and Structural Policies

October 2025, Box 3.3

164

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

IMF EXECUTIVE BOARD DISCUSSION OF THE OUTLOOK,
SEPTEMBER 2025

The following remarks were made by the Chair at the conclusion of the Executive Board’s discussion of the
Fiscal Monitor, Global Financial Stability Report, and World Economic Outlook on September 29, 2025.

E

xecutive Directors broadly agreed with staff ’s
assessment of the global economic outlook,
risks, and policy priorities. They welcomed
the recent economic resilience despite repeated
shocks, noting the importance of stronger economic
fundamentals and policy frameworks in EMDEs.
Directors acknowledged, however, that major policy
shifts are reshaping the global economic landscape
and broadly concurred that the recent resilience, also
supported by temporary factors, could be fragile as
lingering vulnerabilities, elevated policy uncertainty,
and fragmentation continue to weigh on growth
prospects. At the same time, a view was held that
staff ’s overall characterization of the global economic
environment is overly pessimistic. Directors cautioned
that protectionism and significant cuts to foreign aid
disproportionately affect the outlook for the world’s
poorest economies, undermining their convergence
prospects.
Directors broadly concurred that risks to the
outlook are tilted to the downside, including from
prolonged policy uncertainty and any escalation
in trade tensions, as well as from rising fiscal
vulnerabilities, increased fragilities in financial markets,
and their potentially adverse interactions. With high
debt service obligations and rollover needs, a continued
rise in government borrowing costs would further
reduce fiscal space, challenging efforts to rebuild fiscal
buffers and making bond market functioning more
fragile. Directors also acknowledged that stretched
risk asset valuations and higher interconnectedness
between banks and nonbank financial institutions
(NBFIs) has kept financial stability risks elevated. They
also recognized the risks stemming from eroding good
governance and the independence of key economic
institutions. Labor supply shocks, regional conflicts,
including Russia’s war in Ukraine, and commodity
price volatility are additional risks to the outlook.

Directors broadly underscored the need to
reinvigorate multilateral cooperation to meaningfully
reduce trade policy uncertainty by re-anchoring trade
in an open, rules-based and transparent system. They
acknowledged the need to modernize trade rules and
lower barriers, including through regional agreements
that remain open to and do not discriminate against
third parties. There was general recognition that
trade diplomacy should work hand in hand with
a coordinated approach to implement domestic
macroeconomic adjustments and address distortions
behind internal and external imbalances. Attention
was also brought to the role of the global financial
safety net in mitigating systemic risks and, in this
regard, the importance of continued progress on Fund
concessional resources and a strong, quota-based, and
adequately resourced IMF at its center.
Directors highlighted the need for the Fund to
provide tailored fiscal advice that takes country
specific circumstances into account. They stressed
the importance of rebuilding fiscal buffers and
creating space for new spending demands while
safeguarding debt sustainability. Directors called for
fiscal consolidation with realistic and credible plans
that are anchored in robust medium term fiscal
frameworks and combine spending rationalization and
revenue generation, while protecting the vulnerable.
They emphasized the need to prioritize measures
that raise efficiency of public spending and support
sustainable and inclusive private sector led growth,
while avoiding blanket spending cuts. Where new
discretionary support is warranted, it should be
transparent, targeted, and temporary. Directors
noted the potential for reforms to pensions, health
care, wage bills, and tax expenditures to create fiscal
room for spending that promotes long run economic
growth. In countries where debt is unsustainable, they
emphasized the importance of cooperation through the

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

165

WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK: Global Economy in Flux, Prospects Remain Dim

G20 Common Framework and the Global Sovereign
Debt Roundtable to seek timely and orderly debt
restructuring.
Directors emphasized the importance of central
bank independence and their insulation from political
pressures for the anchoring of inflation expectations
and the pursuit of price stability in line with their
respective mandates. Monetary policy should be datadriven, calibrated to country-specific circumstances—
with careful assessment of the nature of shocks and
the output gap—and clearly communicated. In
economies experiencing supply shocks, a gradual
easing of the policy stance should be considered
provided that disinflation is clearly established. Where
weaker demand dominates, cautious consideration
can be given to a reduction in policy rates. A prudent
approach to monetary policy easing can also help
contain asset valuation pressures. For countries
experiencing excessive exchange rate volatility and
with shallow foreign exchange markets, the use of
temporary foreign exchange interventions and capital
flow measures may be appropriate, consistent with the
advice of the Integrated Policy Framework, alongside
further deepening local bond markets while managing
risks from the bank-sovereign nexus. Directors also
called on the authorities to continue to use their
macroprudential tools, as appropriate, and generally
supported the consistent and timely implementation
of internationally-agreed regulatory frameworks, like
Basel III, to mitigate macro-financial stability risks.
It will also be important to address data gaps and

166

International Monetary Fund | October 2025

strengthen regulation of NBFIs and digital assets,
including stablecoins.
Directors acknowledged the importance of boosting
productivity and re-igniting growth over the medium
term. They called for comprehensive and carefully
sequenced structural reform packages, taking into
account country-specific circumstances including social
and political economy considerations. Priority reforms
include encouraging labor mobility and participation,
increasing digitalization and AI readiness, and
improving the business climate and competition to
reallocate labor and capital to the most productive
firms. Directors generally welcomed the Fund’s analysis
on industrial policies, with many calling for further
work in this area, including expanding its scope to
include a discussion of spillover risks and related
policy advice. Directors cautioned that the expanding
use of industrial policies involves opportunity costs
and tradeoffs, including fiscal costs, higher consumer
prices, and resource misallocation. Where pursued,
industrial policies should be transparent and focus on
addressing market failures, targeting areas with the
highest potential for positive spillovers and impact on
supply-side capacity and job creation, supported by
complementary structural reforms. Directors generally
noted that strong governance is key for their successful
implementation and called on governments to stay
agile in monitoring their impact and scaling back or
discontinuing ineffective measures. A few Directors
also stressed the importance of leveraging historical
experiences in the conduct of industrial policies.

IN THIS ISSUE:
CHAPTER 1
Global Prospects and Policies
CHAPTER 2

Emerging Market Resilience:
Good Luck or Good Policies?
CHAPTER 3

Industrial Policy: Managing Trade-Offs
to Promote Growth and Resilience

IBSN
WORLD ECONOMIC OUTLOOK

OCTOBER 2025

